@c This is part of the Emacs manual.
@c Copyright (C) 1994,1995,1996,1997,1999,2000,2001
@c  Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c See file emacs.texi for copying conditions.
@c
@node Acknowledgments, Screen, Concept Index, Top
@chapter Acknowledgments

Many people have contributed code included in the Free Software
Foundation's distribution of GNU Emacs.  To show our appreciation for
their public spirit, we list here in alphabetical order those who have
written substantial portions.

@c We should list here anyone who has contributed a new package,
@c and anyone who has made major enhancements in Emacs
@c that many users would notice and consider important.

@itemize @bullet
@item
Per Abrahamsen wrote the customization buffer facilities, as well as
@file{double.el} for typing accented characters not normally available
from the keyboard, @file{xt-mouse.el} which handles mouse commands
through Xterm, @file{gnus-cus.el} which implements customization
commands for Gnus, @file{gnus-cite.el}, a citation-parsing facility
for news articles and @file{cpp.el} which hides or highlights parts of
C programs according to preprocessor conditionals.

@item
Tomas Abrahamsson wrote @file{artist.el}, a package for producing ASCII
art with a mouse or with keyboard keys.

@item
Jay K.@: Adams wrote @file{jka-compr.el}, providing automatic
decompression and recompression for compressed files.

@item
Joe Arceneaux wrote the original text property implementation, and
implemented support for X11.

@item
Miles Bader wrote @file{image-file.el}, support code for visiting image
files; and @file{minibuf-eldef.el}, a minor mode whereby the default
value is shown in the minibuffer prompt only when appropriate.

@item
David Bakhash wrote @file{strokes.el}, a mode for controlling Emacs by
moving the mouse in particular patterns.

@item
Eli Barzilay wrote @file{calculator.el}, a desktop calculator for
Emacs.

@item
Steven L.@: Baur wrote
@c If earcon.el actually works with Emacs 21, it isn't useful for lack
@c of  sound files. -- fx
@c @file{earcon.el}, a facility for sound effects
@c for email and news messages, 
@file{footnote.el} which lets you include
footnotes in email messages, and @file{gnus-audio.el} which provides
sound effects for Gnus.

@item
Boaz Ben-Zvi wrote @file{profile.el}, to time Emacs Lisp functions.

@item
Ray Blaak wrote @file{delphi.el}, a major mode for editing Delphi
(Object Pascal) source code.

@item
Jim Blandy wrote Emacs 19's input system, brought its configuration and
build process up to the GNU coding standards, and contributed to the
frame support and multi-face support.  Jim also wrote @file{tvi970.el},
terminal support for the TeleVideo 970 terminals.

@item
Per Bothner wrote @file{term.el}, a terminal emulator in an Emacs
buffer.

@item
Terrence M.@: Brannon wrote @file{landmark.el}, a neural-network robot
that learns landmarks.

@item
Frank Bresz wrote @file{diff.el}, a program to display @code{diff}
output.

@item
Peter Breton implemented:

@itemize @minus
@item
@file{dirtrack} which does better tracking of directory changes in shell
buffers,
@item
@file{filecache.el} which records which directories your files are in,
@item
@file{locate.el} which interfaces to the @code{locate} command,
@item
@file{find-lisp.el}, an Emacs Lisp emulation of the @code{find} program,
@item
@file{net-utils.el}, and
@item
the ``generic mode'' feature.
@end itemize

@item
Emmanuel Briot wrote @file{xml.el}, an XML parser for Emacs.

@item
Kevin Broadey wrote @file{foldout.el}, providing folding extensions to
Emacs's outline modes.

@c  @item
@c  Vincent Broman wrote @file{ada.el}, a mode for editing Ada code
@c  (since replaced by @file{ada-mode.el}).

@item
David M.@: Brown wrote @file{array.el}, for editing arrays and other
tabular data.

@item
W@l{}odek Bzyl and Ryszard Kubiak wrote @file{ogonek.el}, a package for
changing the encoding of Polish characters.

@item
Bill Carpenter provided @file{feedmail.el}, a package for massaging
outgoing mail messages and sending them through various popular mailers.

@item
Per Cederqvist and Inge Wallin wrote @file{ewoc.el}, an Emacs widget for
manipulating object collections.

@item
Hans Chalupsky wrote @file{advice.el}, an overloading mechanism for
Emacs Lisp functions, and @file{trace.el}, a tracing facility for Emacs
Lisp.

@item
Chris Chase and Carsten Dominik wrote @file{idlwave.el}, an editing mode
for IDL and WAVE CL.

@item
Bob Chassell wrote @file{texnfo-upd.el} and @file{makeinfo.el}, modes
and utilities for working with Texinfo files; and @file{page-ext.el},
commands for extended page handling.

@item
Andrew Choi wrote the Macintosh support code, and contributed
@file{mac-win.el}, support for the Mac window system.

@item
James Clark wrote @file{sgml-mode.el}, a mode for editing SGML
documents, and contributed to Emacs's dumping procedures.

@item
Mike Clarkson wrote @file{edt.el}, an emulation of DEC's EDT editor.

@item
Glynn Clements provided @file{gamegrid.el} and a couple of games that
use it, Snake and Tetris.

@item
Georges Brun-Cottan and Stefan Monnier wrote @file{easy-mmode.el}, a
package for easy definition of major and minor modes.

@item
Andrew Csillag wrote M4 mode (@file{m4-mode.el}).

@item
Doug Cutting and Jamie Zawinski wrote @file{disass.el}, a disassembler
for compiled Emacs Lisp code.

@item
Michael DeCorte wrote @file{emacs.csh}, a C-shell script that starts a
new Emacs job, or restarts a paused Emacs if one exists.

@item
Gary Delp wrote @file{mailpost.el}, an interface between RMAIL and the
@file{/usr/uci/post} mailer.

@item
Matthieu Devin wrote @file{delsel.el}, a package to make newly-typed
text replace the current selection.

@item
Eric Ding contributed @file{goto-addr.el}, 

@item
Carsten Dominik wrote @file{reftex.el}, a package for setting up
labels and cross-references in La@TeX{} documents.

@item
Scott Draves wrote @file{tq.el}, help functions for maintaining
transaction queues between Emacs and its subprocesses.

@item
Benjamin Drieu wrote @file{pong.el}, an implementation of the classical
pong game.

@item
Viktor Dukhovni wrote support for dumping under SunOS version 4.

@item
John Eaton co-wrote Octave mode (@file{octave-mod.el} and related files).

@item
Rolf Ebert co-wrote Ada mode (@file{ada-mode.el}).

@item
Stephen Eglen implemented @file{mspools.el}, for use with Procmail,
which tells you which mail folders have mail waiting in them, and
@file{iswitchb.el}, a feature for incremental reading and completion of
buffer names.

@item
Torbj@"orn
Einarsson contributed the  Fortran 90 mode (@file{f90.el}).

@item
Tsugutomo Enami co-wrote the support for international character sets.

@item
Hans Henrik Eriksen wrote @file{simula.el}, a mode for editing SIMULA 87
code.

@item
Michael Ernst wrote @file{reposition.el}, a command for recentering a
function's source code and preceding comment on the screen.

@item
Ata Etemadi wrote @file{cdl.el}, functions for working with Common Data
Language source code.

@item
Frederick Farnbach implemented @file{morse.el}, which converts text to
Morse code.

@item
Oscar Figueiredo wrote EUDC, the Emacs Unified Directory Client, which
is an interface to directory servers via LDAP, CCSO PH/QI, or BBDB; and
@file{ldap.el}, the LDAP client interface.

@item
Fred Fish wrote the support for dumping COFF executable files.

@item
Karl Fogel wrote:

@itemize @minus
@item
@file{bookmark.el}, for creating named placeholders, saving them and
jumping to them later,
@item
@file{mail-hist.el}, a history mechanism for outgoing mail messages, and
@item
@file{saveplace.el}, for preserving point's location in files between
editing sessions.
@end itemize

@item
Gary Foster wrote @file{crisp.el}, the emulation for CRiSP and Brief
editors, and @file{scroll-lock.el} (now @file{scroll-all.el}) a mode
for scrolling several buffers together.

@item
Noah Friedman wrote @file{rlogin.el}, an interface to Rlogin,
@file{type-break.el}, which reminds you to take periodic breaks from
typing, and @code{eldoc-mode}, a mode to show the defined parameters or
the doc string for the Lisp function near point.  With Roland McGrath,
he wrote @file{rsz-mini.el}, a minor mode to automatically resize the
minibuffer to fit the text it contains.

@item
Keith Gabryelski wrote @file{hexl.el}, a mode for editing binary files.

@item
Kevin Gallagher rewrote and enhanced the EDT emulation, and wrote
@file{flow-ctrl.el}, a package for coping with unsuppressible XON/XOFF
flow control.

@item
Kevin Gallo added multiple-frame support for Windows NT and wrote
@file{w32-win.el}, support functions for the MS-Windows window system.

@item
Howard Gayle wrote:

@itemize @minus
@item
the C and lisp code for display tables and case tables,
@item
@file{rot13.el}, a command to display the plain-text form of a buffer
encoded with the Caesar cipher,
@item
@file{case-table.el}, code to extend the character set and support case
tables,
@item
much of the support for the ISO-8859 European character sets (which
includes @file{iso-ascii.el}, @file{iso-insert.el}, @file{iso-swed.el},
@file{latin-1.el}, @file{iso-syntax.el}, @file{iso-transl.el},
@file{swedish.el}), and
@item
@file{vt100-led.el}, a package for controlling the LED's on
VT100-compatible terminals.
@end itemize

@item
Stephen Gildea made the Emacs quick reference card, and made many
contributions for @file{time-stamp.el}, a package for maintaining
last-change time stamps in files.

@item
Julien Gilles wrote @file{gnus-ml.el}, a mailing list minor mode for
Gnus.

@item
David Gillespie wrote:

@itemize @minus
@item
Emacs 19's Common Lisp compatibility packages, replacing the old package
by Cesar Augusto Quiroz Gonzalez,
@item
@file{complete.el}, a partial completion mechanism, and
@item
@file{edmacro.el}, a package for editing keyboard macros.
@end itemize

@item
Bob Glickstein contributed the @file{sregex.el} feature, a facility for
writing regexps using a Lisp-like syntax.

@item
Boris Goldowsky wrote:

@itemize @minus
@item
@file{avoid.el}, a package to keep the mouse cursor out of the way of
the text cursor,
@item
@file{shadowfile.el}, a package for keeping identical copies of files in
more than one place,
@item
@file{format.el}, a package for reading and writing files in various
formats,
@item
@file{enriched.el}, a package for saving text properties in files, and
@item
@file{facemenu.el}, a package for specifying faces.
@end itemize

@item
Michelangelo Grigni wrote @file{ffap.el} which visits a file,
taking the file name from the buffer.

@item
Odd Gripenstam wrote @file{dcl-mode.el} for editing DCL command files.

@item
Michael Gschwind wrote @file{iso-cvt.el}, a package to convert between
the ISO 8859-1 character set and the notations for non-ASCII
characters used by @TeX{} and net tradition, and @file{latin-2.el}, code
which sets up case-conversion and syntax tables for the ISO Latin-2
character set.

@item
Henry Guillaume wrote @file{find-file.el}, a package to visit files
related to the currently visited file.

@item
Doug Gwyn wrote the portable @code{alloca} implementation.

@item
Ken'ichi Handa implemented most of the support for international
character sets, and wrote @file{isearch-x.el}, a facility for searching
non-ASCII text.  Together with Naoto Takahashi, he wrote
@file{quail.el}, a simple input facility for typing non-ASCII text from
an ASCII keyboard.  Ken'ichi also wrote @file{ps-bdf.el}, a BDF font
support for printing non-ASCII text on a PostScript printer.

@item
Chris Hanson wrote @file{netuname.el}, a package to use HP-UX's Remote
File Access facility from Emacs.

@item
K. Shane Hartman wrote:

@itemize @minus
@item
@file{chistory.el} and @file{echistory.el}, packages for browsing
command history lists,
@item
@file{electric.el} and @file{helper.el}, providing an alternative
command loop and appropriate help facilities,
@item
@file{emacsbug.el}, a package for reporting Emacs bugs,
@item
@file{picture.el}, a mode for editing ASCII pictures, and
@item
@file{view.el}, a package for perusing files and buffers without editing
them.
@end itemize

@item
John Heidemann wrote @file{mouse-copy.el} and @file{mouse-drag.el},
which provide alternative mouse-based editing and scrolling features.
He also contributed @file{zone-mode.el}, a major mode for editing DNS
zone files.

@item
Jon K Hellan wrote @file{utf7.el}, support for mail-safe transformation
format of Unicode.

@item
Markus Heritsch co-wrote Ada mode (@file{ada-mode.el}).

@item
Karl Heuer wrote the original blessmail script, implemented the
@code{intangible} text property, and rearranged the structure of the
@code{Lisp_Object} type to allow for more data bits.

@item
Manabu Higashida ported Emacs to MS-DOS.

@item
Anders Holst wrote @file{hippie-exp.el}, a versatile completion and
expansion package.

@item
Kurt Hornik co-wrote Octave mode (@file{octave-mod.el} and related files).

@item
Tom Houlder wrote @file{mantemp.el}, which generates manual C@t{++}
template instantiations.

@item
Denis Howe wrote @file{browse-url.el}, a package for invoking a WWW
browser to display a URL.

@item
Lars Magne Ingebrigtsen did a major redesign of the Gnus news-reader and
wrote many of its parts.

@item
Andrew Innes contributed extensively to the MS-Windows support.

@item
Seiichiro Inoue improved Emacs's XIM support.

@item
Kyle Jones wrote @file{life.el}, a package to play Conway's ``life'' game,
and @file{mldrag.el}, a package which allows the user to resize windows
by dragging mode lines and vertical window separators with the mouse.

@item
Terry Jones wrote @file{shadow.el}, a package for finding potential
load-path problems when some Lisp file ``shadows'' another.

@item
Simon Josefsson wrote @file{flow-fill.el}, a package for interpreting
RFC2646 formatted text in messages, @file{imap.el}, an Emacs Lisp
library for talking to IMAP servers, @file{nnimap}, the IMAP back-end
for Gnus, @file{rfc2104.el}, a hashed message authentication facility,
and @file{fringe.el} a package for customizing the fringe.

@item
Tomoji Kagatani implemented @file{smtpmail.el}, used for sending out
mail with SMTP.

@item
David Kaufman wrote @file{yow.c}, an essential utility program for the
hopelessly pinheaded.

@item
Henry Kautz wrote @file{bib-mode.el}, a mode for maintaining
bibliography databases compatible with @code{refer} (the @code{troff}
version) and @code{lookbib}, and @file{refbib.el}, a package to convert
those databases to the format used by the LaTeX text formatting package.

@item
Howard Kaye wrote @file{sort.el}, commands to sort text in Emacs
buffers.

@item
Michael Kifer wrote @file{ediff.el}, an interactive interface to the
@command{diff}, @command{patch}, and @command{merge} programs, and
Viper, the newest emulation for VI.

@item
Richard King wrote the first version of @file{userlock.el} and
@file{filelock.c}, which provide simple support for multiple users
editing the same file.  He also wrote the initial version of
@file{uniquify.el}, a facility to make buffer names unique by adding
parts of the file's name to the buffer name.
@c We're not using his backquote.el any more.

@item
Peter Kleiweg wrote @file{ps-mode.el}, a major mode for editing
PostScript files and running a PostScript interpreter interactively from
within Emacs.

@item
Larry K.@: Kolodney wrote @file{cvtmail.c}, a program to convert the mail
directories used by Gosling Emacs into RMAIL format.

@item
David M.@: Koppelman wrote @file{hi-lock.el}, a minor mode for
interactive automatic highlighting of parts of the buffer text.

@item
Robert Krawitz wrote the original @file{xmenu.c}, part of Emacs's pop-up
menu support.

@item
Sebastian Kremer wrote Emacs 19's @code{dired-mode}, with contributions
by Lawrence R.@: Dodd.  He also wrote @file{ls-lisp.el}, a Lisp emulation
of the @code{ls} command for platforms which don't have @code{ls} as a
standard program.

@item
Geoff Kuenning wrote Emacs 19's @file{ispell.el}, based on work by Ken
Stevens and others.

@item
David K@ringaccent{a}gedal wrote @file{tempo.el}, providing support for
easy insertion of boilerplate text and other common constructions.

@item
Daniel LaLiberte wrote:

@itemize @minus
@item
@file{edebug.el}, a source-level debugger for Emacs Lisp,
@item
@file{cl-specs.el}, specifications to help @code{edebug} debug code
written using David Gillespie's Common Lisp support,
@item
@file{cust-print.el}, a customizable package for printing lisp objects,
@item
@file{eval-reg.el}, a re-implementation of @code{eval-region} in Emacs
Lisp, and
@item
@file{isearch.el}, Emacs's incremental search minor mode.
@end itemize

@item
James R.@: Larus wrote @file{mh-e.el}, an interface to the MH mail system.

@item
Vinicius Jose Latorre wrote:

@itemize @minus
@item
@code{ps-print}, a package for pretty-printing Emacs buffers to
PostScript printers,
@item
@file{delim-col.el}, a package to arrange text into columns,
@item
@file{ebnf2ps.el}, a package that translates EBNF grammar to a syntactic
chart that can be printed to a PostScript printer.
@end itemize

@item
Frederic Lepied contributed @file{expand.el}, which uses the abbrev
mechanism for inserting programming constructs.

@item
Peter Liljenberg wrote @file{elint.el}, a Lint-style code checker for
Emacs Lisp programs.

@item
Lars Lindberg wrote @file{msb.el}, which provides more flexible menus
for buffer selection, and rewrote @file{dabbrev.el}.

@item
Anders Lindgren wrote @file{autorevert.el}, a package for automatically
reverting files visited by Emacs that were changed on disk;
@file{cwarn.el}, a package to highlight suspicious C and C@t{++}
constructs; and @file{follow.el}, a minor mode to synchronize windows
that show the same buffer.

@item
Dave Love wrote:

@itemize @minus
@item
@code{autoarg-mode}, a global minor mode whereby digit keys supply
prefix arguments, and @code{autoarg-kp-mode} which redefines the keypad
numeric keys to digit arguments,
@item
@file{autoconf.el}, a mode for editing Autoconf @file{configure.in}
files,
@item
@file{elide-head.el}, a package for eliding boilerplate text, such as
copyright notices, from file headers,
@item
@file{hl-line.el}, a package that provides a minor mode for highlighting
the line in the current window on which point is,
@item
@file{latin-8.el} and @file{latin-9.el}, code which sets up
case-conversion and syntax tables for the ISO Latin-8 and Latin-9
character sets,
@item
@file{latin1-disp.el}, a package that lets you display ISO 8859
characters on Latin-1 terminals by setting up appropriate display
tables,
@item
@file{refill.el}, a mode for automatic paragraph refilling, akin to
typical word processors,
@item
@file{smiley-ems.el}, a facility for displaying smiley faces, and
@item
@file{tool-bar.el}, a mode to control the display of the Emacs tool bar.
@end itemize

@item
Eric Ludlam wrote the Speedbar package and @file{checkdoc.el}, a package
for checking doc strings in Emacs Lisp programs.

@item
Christopher J.@: Madsen wrote @file{decipher.el}, a package for cracking
simple substitution ciphers.

@item
Neil M.@: Mager wrote @file{appt.el}, functions to notify users of their
appointments.  It finds appointments recorded in the diary files
generated by Edward M.@: Reingold's @code{calendar} package.

@item
Ken Manheimer wrote @file{allout.el}, a mode for manipulating and
formatting outlines, and @file{icomplete.el}, which provides incremental
completion feedback in the minibuffer.

@item
Bill Mann wrote @file{perl-mode.el}, a mode for editing Perl code.

@item
Brian Marick and Daniel LaLiberte wrote @file{hideif.el}, support for
hiding selected code within C @code{#ifdef} clauses.

@item
Simon Marshall wrote:

@itemize @minus
@item
@file{fast-lock.el}, which caches the face data computed by Font Lock mode,
@item
@file{lazy-lock.el}, which delays fontification in Font Lock mode
until text is actually displayed, and
@item
@file{regexp-opt.el}, which generates a regular expression from a list
of strings.
@end itemize

Simon also extended @file{comint.el}, originally written by Olin
Shivers.

@item
Bengt Martensson, Mark Shapiro, Mike Newton, Aaron Larson, and Stefan
Schoef, wrote @file{bibtex.el}, a mode for editing Bib@TeX{}
bibliography files.
 
@item
Charlie Martin wrote @file{autoinsert.el}, which provides automatic
mode-sensitive insertion of text into new files.

@item
Thomas May wrote @file{blackbox.el}, a version of the traditional
blackbox game.

@item
Roland McGrath wrote:

@itemize @minus
@item
@file{compile.el}, a package for running compilations in a buffer, and
then visiting the locations reported in error messages,
@item
@file{etags.el}, a package for jumping to function definitions and
searching or replacing in all the files mentioned in a @file{TAGS} file,
@item
@file{find-dired.el}, for using @code{dired} commands on output from the
@code{find} program, with Sebastian Kremer,
@item
@file{map-ynp.el}, a general purpose boolean question-asker,
@item
@file{autoload.el}, providing semi-automatic maintenance of autoload
files, and
@item
@file{upd-copyr.el}, providing semi-automatic maintenance of copyright
notices in source code.
@end itemize

@item
David Megginson wrote @file{derived.el}, which allows one to define new
major modes by inheriting key bindings and commands from existing major
modes.

@item
Will Mengarini wrote @file{repeat.el}, a command to repeat the preceding
command with its arguments.

@item
Wayne Mesard wrote @file{hscroll.el} which does horizontal scrolling
automatically.

@item
Brad Miller wrote @file{gnus-gl.el}, a Gnus interface for GroupLens.

@item
Richard Mlynarik wrote:

@itemize @minus
@item
@file{cl-indent.el}, a package for indenting Common Lisp code,
@item
@file{ebuff-menu.el}, an ``electric'' browser for buffer listings,
@item
@file{ehelp.el}, bindings for browsing help screens,
@item
@file{rfc822.el}, a parser for E-mail addresses in the RFC-822 format,
used in mail messages and news articles,
@item
@file{terminal.el}, a terminal emulator for Emacs subprocesses, and 
@item
@file{yow.el}, an essential utility (try @kbd{M-x yow}).
@end itemize

@item
Gerd Moellmann wrote:

@itemize @minus
@item
the new display engine for Emacs 21,
@item
the asynchronous timers facility (@file{atimer.c}),
@item
the @code{ebrowse} C@t{++} browser,
@item
@file{jit-lock.el}, the Just-In-Time font-lock support mode,
@item
@file{tooltip.el}, a package for displaying tooltips, and
@item
@file{authors.el} package for maintaining the @file{AUTHORS} files.
@end itemize

Gerd took over the Emacs maintenance as the head maintainer since the
beginning of Emacs 21 development.

@item
Stefan Monnier wrote:

@itemize @minus
@item
@code{PCL-CVS}, a directory-level front end to the CVS version control
system,
@item
@file{smerge-mode.el}, a minor mode for resolving @code{diff3}
conflicts, and
@item
@file{diff-mode.el}, a mode for viewing and editing context diffs.
@end itemize

@item
Morioka Tomohiko wrote several packages for MIME support in Gnus and
elsewhere.

@item
Sen Nagata wrote @file{crm.el}, a package for reading multiple strings
with completion, and @file{rfc2368.el}, support for @code{mailto:}
URLs.

@item
Erik Naggum wrote the time-conversion functions.  He also wrote
@file{disp-table.el}, a package for dealing with display tables,
@file{latin-4.el} and @file{latin-5.el}, code which sets up
case-conversion and syntax tables for the ISO Latin-4 and Latin-5
character sets, @file{mailheader.el}, a pacakage for parsing email
headers, and @file{parse-time.el}, a package for parsing time strings.

@item
Thomas Neumann and Eric Raymond wrote @file{makefile.el} (now
@file{make-mode.el}), a mode for editing makefiles.

@item
Thien-Thi Nguyen and Dan Nicolaescu wrote @file{hideshow.el}, a minor
mode for selectively displaying blocks of text.

@item
Dan Nicolaescu wrote @file{romanian.el}, support for editing Romanian
text, and @file{iris-ansi.el}, support for running Emacs on SGI's
@code{xwsh} and @code{winterm} terminal emulators.

@item
Jurgen Nickelsen wrote @file{ws-mode.el}, providing WordStar emulation.

@item
Jeff Norden wrote @file{kermit.el}, a package to help the Kermit
dialup communications program run comfortably in an Emacs shell buffer.

@item
Andrew Norman wrote @file{ange-ftp.el}, providing transparent FTP
support.

@item
Alexandre Oliva wrote @file{gnus-mlspl.el}, a group params-based mail
splitting mechanism.

@item
David Pearson contributed @file{quickurl.el}, a simple method of
inserting a URL into the current buffer based on text at point;
@file{5x5.el}, a game to fill all squares on the field.

@item
Jeff Peck wrote:

@itemize @minus
@item
@file{emacstool.c}, support for running Emacs under SunView/Sun Windows,
@item
@file{sun.el}, key bindings for sunterm keys,
@item
@file{sun-curs.el}, cursor definitions for Sun Windows, and 
@item
@file{sun-fns.el} and @file{sun-mouse.el}, providing mouse support for
Sun Windows.
@end itemize

@item
Damon Anton Permezel wrote @file{hanoi.el}, an animated demonstration of
the ``Towers of Hanoi'' puzzle.

@item
William M.@: Perry wrote @file{mailcap.el}, a MIME media types
configuration facility, and @file{mwheel.el}, support for MS
Intellimouse type mice with wheels.

@item
Per Persson wrote @file{gnus-vm.el}, the VM interface for Gnus.

@item
Jens Petersen wrote @file{find-func.el}, which makes it easy to find
the source code for an Emacs Lisp function or variable.

@item
Daniel Pfeiffer wrote:

@itemize @minus
@item
@file{copyright.el}, a package for updating copyright notices in files,
@item
@file{executable.el}, a package for executing interpreter scripts,
@item
@file{sh-script.el}, a mode for editing shell scripts,
@item
@file{skeleton.el}, implementing a concise language for writing
statement skeletons, and
@item
@file{two-column.el}, a minor mode for simultaneous two-column editing.
@end itemize

Daniel also rewrote @file{apropos.el}, originally written by Joe Wells,
and, together with Jim Blandy, co-authored @file{wyse50.el}, support for
Wyse 50 terminals.

@item
Richard L.@: Pieri wrote @file{pop3.el}, a Post Office Protocol (RFC
1460) interface for Emacs.

@item
Fred Pierresteguy and Paul Reilly made Emacs work with X Toolkit
widgets.

@item
Christian Plaunt wrote @file{soundex.el}, an implementation of the
Soundex algorithm for comparing English words by their pronunciation.

@item
David Ponce wrote @file{recentf.el}, a package that puts a menu of
recently visited files in the Emacs menu bar.

@item
Francesco A.@: Potorti wrote @file{cmacexp.el}, providing a command which
runs the C preprocessor on a region of a file and displays the results.
He also expanded and redesigned the @code{etags} program.

@item
Michael D.@: Prange and Steven A.@: Wood wrote @file{fortran.el}, a mode for
editing FORTRAN code.
@c We're not distributing his tex-mode.el anymore; we're using Ed Reingold's.

@item
Mukesh Prasad contributed @file{vmsproc.el}, a facility for running
asynchronous subprocesses on VMS.

@item
Marko Rahamaa wrote @file{latin-3.el}, code which sets up
case-conversion and syntax tables for the ISO Latin-3 charact set.

@item
Ashwin Ram wrote @file{refer.el}, commands to look up references in
bibliography files by keyword.

@item
Eric S.@: Raymond wrote:

@itemize @minus
@item
@file{vc.el}, an interface to the RCS and SCCS source code version
control systems, with Paul Eggert,
@item
@file{gud.el}, a package for running source-level debuggers like GDB
and SDB in Emacs,
@item
@file{asm-mode.el}, a mode for editing assembly language code,
@item
@file{AT386.el}, terminal support package for IBM's AT keyboards,
@item
@file{cookie1.el}, support for ``fortune-cookie'' programs like
@file{yow.el} and @file{spook.el},
@item
@file{finder.el}, a package for finding Emacs Lisp packages by keyword
and topic,
@item
@file{keyswap.el}, code to swap the @key{BS} and @key{DEL} keys,
@item
@file{loadhist.el}, functions for loading and unloading Emacs features,
@item
@file{lisp-mnt.el}, functions for working with the special headers used
in Emacs Lisp library files, and
@item
code to set and make use of the @code{load-history} lisp variable, which
records the source file from which each lisp function loaded into Emacs
came.
@end itemize

@item
Edward M.@: Reingold wrote the extensive calendar and diary support (try
@kbd{M-x calendar}), with contributions from Stewart Clamen, Nachum
Dershowitz, Paul Eggert, Steve Fisk, Michael Kifer, and Lara Rios.  Andy
Oram contributed to its documentation.  Reingold has also contributed to
@file{tex-mode.el}, a mode for editing @TeX{} files, as have William
F.@: Schelter, Dick King, Stephen Gildea, Michael Prange, and Jacob Gore.

@item
Alex Rezinsky contributed @file{which-func.el}, a mode that shows the
name of the current function in the mode line.

@item
Rob Riepel contributed @file{tpu-edt.el} and its associated files,
providing an emulation of the VMS TPU text editor emulating the VMS EDT
editor, and @file{vt-control.el}, providing some control functions for
the DEC VT line of terminals.

@item
Roland B.@: Roberts contributed much of the VMS support distributed with
Emacs 19, along with Joseph M.@: Kelsey, and @file{vms-pmail.el}, support
for using Emacs within VMS MAIL.

@item
John Robinson wrote @file{bg-mouse.el}, support for the mouse on the BBN
Bitgraph terminal.

@item
Danny Roozendaal implemented @file{handwrite.el}, which converts text
into ``handwriting.''

@item
William Rosenblatt wrote @file{float.el}, implementing a floating-point
numeric type using Lisp cons cells and integers.

@item
Guillermo J.@: Rozas wrote @file{scheme.el}, a mode for editing Scheme and
DSSSL code, and @file{fakemail.c}, an interface to the System V mailer.

@item
Ivar Rummelhoff provided @file{winner.el}, which records
recent window configurations so you can move back to them.

@item
Jason Rumney has ported the Emacs 21 display engine to MS-Windows, and
contributed extensively to the MS-Windows port of Emacs.

@item
Wolfgang Rupprecht contributed Emacs 19's floating-point support
(including @file{float-sup.el} and @file{floatfns.c}), and
@file{sup-mouse.el}, support for the Supdup mouse on lisp machines.

@item
James B.@: Salem and Brewster Kahle wrote @file{completion.el}, providing
dynamic word completion.

@item
Masahiko Sato wrote @file{vip.el}, an emulation of the VI editor.

@item
Holger Schauer wrote @file{fortune.el}, a package for using fortune in
message signatures.

@item
William Schelter wrote @file{telnet.el}, support for @code{telnet}
sessions within Emacs.

@item
Ralph Schleicher contributed @file{battery.el}, a package for displaying
laptop computer battery status, and @file{info-look.el}, a package for
looking up Info documentation for symbols in the buffer.

@item
Michael Schmidt and Tom Perrine wrote @file{modula2.el}, a mode for
editing Modula-2 code, based on work by Mick Jordan and Peter Robinson.

@item
Ronald S.@: Schnell wrote @file{dunnet.el}, a text adventure game.

@item
Philippe Schnoebelen wrote @file{gomoku.el}, a Go Moku game played
against Emacs, and @file{mpuz.el}, a multiplication puzzle.

@item
Jan Schormann wrote @file{solitaire.el}, an Emacs Lisp implementation of
the Solitaire game.

@item
Alex Schroeder wrote @file{ansi-color.el}, a package for translating
ANSI color escape sequences to Emacs faces, and @file{sql.el}, a package
for interactively running an SQL interpreter in an Emacs buffer.

@item
Randal Schwartz wrote @file{pp.el}, a pretty-printer for lisp objects.

@item
Oliver Seidel wrote @file{todo-mode.el}, a package for maintaining
@file{TODO} list files.

@item
Manuel Serrano contributed the Flyspell package that does spell checking
as you type.

@item
Hovav Shacham wrote @file{windmove.el}, a set of commands for selecting
windows based on their geometrical position on the frame.

@item
Stanislav Shalunov wrote @file{uce.el}, for responding to unsolicited
commercial email.

@item
Richard Sharman contributed @file{hilit-chg.el}, which uses colors
to show recent editing changes.

@item
Olin Shivers wrote:

@itemize @minus
@item
@file{comint.el}, a library for modes running interactive command-line-
oriented subprocesses,
@item
@file{cmuscheme.el}, for running inferior Scheme processes,
@item
@file{inf-lisp.el}, for running inferior Lisp process, and
@item
@file{shell.el}, for running inferior shells.
@end itemize

@item
Espen Skoglund wrote @file{pascal.el}, a mode for editing Pascal code.

@item
Rick Sladkey wrote @file{backquote.el}, a lisp macro for creating
mostly-constant data.

@item
Lynn Slater wrote @file{help-macro.el}, a macro for writing interactive
help for key bindings.

@item
Chris Smith wrote @file{icon.el}, a mode for editing Icon code.

@item
David Smith wrote @file{ielm.el}, a mode for interacting with the Emacs
Lisp interpreter as a subprocess.

@item
Paul D.@: Smith wrote @file{snmp-mode.el}.

@item
William Sommerfeld wrote @file{scribe.el}, a mode for editing Scribe
files, and @file{server.el}, a package allowing programs to send files
to an extant Emacs job to be edited.

@item
Andre Spiegel made many contributions to the Emacs Version Control
package, and in particular made it support multiple back ends.

@item
Michael Staats wrote @file{pc-select.el}, which rebinds keys for
selecting regions to follow many other systems.

@item
Richard Stallman invented Emacs, and then wrote:

@itemize @minus
@item
@file{easymeny.el}, a facility for defining Emacs menus,
@item
@file{menu-bar.el}, the Emacs menu bar support code,
@item
@file{paren.el}, a package to make matching parentheses stand out in
color, and
@item
most of the rest of Emacs code.
@end itemize

@item
Sam Steingold wrote @file{gulp.el}, a facility for asking package
maintainers for updated versions of their packages via e-mail, and
@file{midnight.el}, a package for running a command every midnight.

@item
Ake Stenhoff and Lars Lindberg wrote @file{imenu.el}, a framework for
browsing indices made from buffer contents.

@item
Peter Stephenson contributed @file{vcursor.el}, which implements a
``virtual cursor'' that you can move with the keyboard and use for
copying text.

@item
Ken Stevens wrote the initial version of @file{ispell.el} and maintains
that package since Ispell 3.1 release.

@item
Jonathan Stigelman wrote @file{hilit19.el}, a package providing
automatic highlighting in source code buffers, mail readers, and other
contexts.

@item
Martin Stjernholm co-authored CC Mode, a major editing mode for C,
C@t{++}, Objective-C, and Java code.

@item
Steve Strassman did not write @file{spook.el}, and even if he did, he
really didn't mean for you to use it in an anarchistic way.

@item
Olaf Sylvester wrote @file{bs.el}, a package for manipulating Emacs
buffers.

@item
Tibor @v{S}imko and Milan Zamazal wrote @file{slovak.el}, support for
editing text in Slovak language.

@item 
Naoto Takahashi wrote @file{utf-8.el}, support for encoding and
decoding UTF-8 data.

@item
Taichi Kawabata wrote support for Devanagari script and the Indian
languages.

@item
Jens T.@: Berger Thielemann wrote @file{word-help.el}, which is
part of the basis for @file{info-look.el}.

@item
Spencer Thomas wrote the original @file{dabbrev.el}, providing a command
which completes the partial word before point, based on other nearby
words for which it is a prefix.  He also wrote the original dumping
support.

@item
Jim Thompson wrote @file{ps-print.el}, which converts
Emacs text to Postscript.

@item
Tom Tromey and Chris Lindblad wrote @file{tcl.el}, a major mode for
editing Tcl/Tk source files and running a Tcl interpeter as an Emacs
subprocess.

@item
Daiki Ueno wrote @file{starttls.el}, support for Transport Layer
Security protocol.

@item
Masanobu Umeda wrote:

@itemize @minus
@item
GNUS, a feature-full reader for Usenet news,
@item
@file{prolog.el}, a mode for editing Prolog code,
@item
@file{rmailsort.el}, a package for sorting messages in RMAIL folders,
@item
@file{metamail.el}, an interface to the Metamail program,
@item
@file{gnus-kill.el}, the Kill File mode for Gnus,
@item
@file{gnus-mh.el}, an mh-e interface for Gnus,
@item
@file{gnus-msg.el}, a mail and post interface for Gnus,
@item
@file{tcp.el}, emulation of the @code{open-network-stream} function for
some Emacs configurations which lack it, and
@item
@file{timezone.el}, providing functions for dealing with time zones.
@end itemize

@item
Rajesh Vaidheeswarran wrote @file{whitespace.el}, a package that
detects and cleans up excess whitespace in a file.

@item
Neil W.@: Van Dyke wrote @file{webjump.el}, a ``hot links'' package.

@item
Didier Verna contributed @file{rect.el}, a package of functions for
operations on rectangle regions of text.

@item
Ulrik Vieth implemented @file{meta-mode.el}, for editing MetaFont code.

@item
Geoffrey Voelker wrote the Windows NT support.  He also wrote
@file{dos-w32.el}, functions shared by the MS-DOS and MS-Windows ports
of Emacs, and @file{w32-fns.el}, MS-Windows specific support functions.

@item
Johan Vromans wrote @file{forms.el} and its associated files, defining a
mode for filling in forms, and @file{iso-acc.el}, a minor mode providing
electric accent keys for text using the ISO-8859 character set.

@item
Barry Warsaw wrote:

@itemize @minus
@item
@file{assoc.el}, a set of utility functions for working with association
lists,
@item
@file{cc-mode.el}, a major mode for editing C, C@t{++}, and Java code,
based on earlier work by Dave Detlefs, Stewart Clamen, and Richard
Stallman,
@item
@file{elp.el}, a new profiler for Emacs Lisp programs.
@item
@file{man.el}, a mode for reading UNIX manual pages,
@item
@file{regi.el}, providing an AWK-like functionality for use in lisp
programs,
@item
@file{reporter.el}, providing customizable bug reporting for lisp
packages, and
@item
@file{supercite.el}, a minor mode for quoting sections of mail messages
and news articles.
@end itemize

@item
Morten Welinder introduced face support into the MS-DOS port of Emacs,
and also wrote:

@itemize @minus
@item
@file{desktop.el}, facilities for saving some of Emacs's state between
sessions,
@item
@file{timer.el}, the Emacs facility to run commands at a given time or
frequency, or when Emacs is idle, and its C-level support code,
@item
@file{pc-win.el}, the MS-DOS ``window-system'' support,
@item
@file{internal.el}, an ``internal terminal'' emulator for the MS-DOS
port of Emacs,
@item
@file{arc-mode.el}, the mode for editing compressed archives,
@item
@file{s-region.el}, commands for setting the region using the shift key
and motion commands, and
@item
@file{dos-fns.el}, functions for use under MS-DOS.
@end itemize

He also helped port Emacs to MS-DOS.

@item
Joseph Brian Wells wrote:

@itemize @minus
@item
@file{apropos.el}, a command to find commands, functions, and variables
whose names contain matches for a regular expression,
@item
@file{resume.el}, support for processing command-line arguments after
resuming a suspended Emacs job, and
@item
@file{mail-extr.el}, a package for extracting names and addresses from
mail headers, with contributions from Jamie Zawinski.
@end itemize

@item
Rodney Whitby and Reto Zimmermann wrote @file{vhdl-mode.el}, a major
mode for editing VHDL source code.

@item
John Wiegley wrote @file{align.el}, a set of commands for aligning text
according to regular-expression based rules; @file{timeclock.el}, a
package for keeping track of time spent on projects;
@file{pcomplete.el}, a programmable completion facility; and
@code{eshell}, a command shell implemented entirely in Emacs Lisp.

@item
Ed Wilkinson wrote @file{b2m.c}, a program to convert mail files from
RMAIL format to Unix @code{mbox} format.

@item
Mike Williams wrote @file{mouse-sel.el}, providing enhanced mouse
selection, and @file{thingatpt.el}, a library of functions for finding
the ``thing'' (word, line, s-expression) containing point.

@item
Bill Wohler wrote the Emacs interface to the MH mail system.

@item
Dale R.@: Worley wrote @file{emerge.el}, a package for interactively
merging two versions of a file.

@item
Francis J.@: Wright wrote @code{WoMan}, a package for browsing
manual pages without the @code{man} command.

@item
Tom Wurgler wrote @file{emacs-lock.el}, which makes it harder
to exit with valuable buffers unsaved.

@item
Ilya Zakharevich and Bob Olson contributed @file{cperl-mode.el}, a major
mode for editing Perl code.  Ilya Zakharevich also wrote @file{tmm.el},
a mode for accessing the Emacs menu bar on a text-mode terminal.

@item
Milan Zamazal wrote @file{czech.el}, support for editing Czech text,
@file{glasses.el}, a package for easier reading of source code which
uses illegible identifier names such as @code{cantReadThisVariable}, and
@file{tildify.el}, commands for adding hard spaces to text, @TeX{}, and
SGML/HTML files.

@item
Victor Zandy contributed @file{zone.el}, a package for people who like
to zone out in front of Emacs.

@item
Eli Zaretskii made many standard Emacs features work on MS-DOS.  He also
wrote @file{tty-colors.el}, which implements transparent mapping of X
colors to tty colors, and (together with Kenichi Handa)
@file{codepage.el}, a package for editing text encoded in DOS/Windows
code pages.

@item
Jamie Zawinski wrote:

@itemize @minus
@item
Emacs 19's optimizing byte compiler, with Hallvard Furuseth,
@item
much of the support for faces and X selections,
@item
@file{mailabbrev.el}, a package providing automatic expansion of mail
aliases, and
@item
@file{tar-mode.el}, providing simple viewing and editing commands for
tar files.
@end itemize

@item
Shenghuo Zhu wrote:

@itemize @minus
@item
@file{binhex.el}, a package for reading and writing binhex files,
@item
@file{mm-partial.el}, message/partial support for MIME messages,
@item
@file{rfc1843.el}, an HZ decoding package,
@item
@file{uudecode.el}, an Emacs Lisp decoder for uuencoded data,
@item
@file{webmail.el}, an interface to Web mail.
@end itemize

@item
Ian T.@: Zimmerman wrote @file{gametree.el}.

@item
Neal Ziring and Felix S.@: T.@: Wu wrote @file{vi.el}, an emulation of the
VI text editor.

@item
Detlev Zundel wrote @file{re-builder.el}, a package for building regexps
with visual feedback.

@end itemize

Others too numerous to mention have reported and fixed bugs, and added
features to many parts of Emacs.  (Many are mentioned in the
@file{ChangeLog} files which are summarized in the file @file{AUTHORS}
in the distribution.)  We thank them for their generosity as well.

This list intended to mention every contributor of a major package or
feature we currently distribute; if you know of someone we have omitted,
please report that as a manual bug.
