\input rotate

\font\title=ptmb at20pt
\font\body=ptmr at12pt
\font\price=ptmr at10pt

\baselineskip=13pt
\parskip=13pt
\parindent=0pt

\nopagenumbers

\hsize=7in
\vsize=9.25in

\voffset=-1in
\hoffset=-1in

\hbox to7in{%
  \vbox to9.25in{
    \hsize=6in
    \leftskip=.75in
    \rightskip=.25in

    \vskip2in

    \title
    \hfil GNU Emacs\hfil

    \body
    Most of the GNU Emacs text editor is written in the programming
    language called Emacs Lisp.  You can write new code in Emacs Lisp and
    install it as an extension to the editor.  However, Emacs Lisp is more
    than a mere ``extension language''; it is a full computer programming
    language in its own right.  You can use it as you would any other
    programming language.

    Because Emacs Lisp is designed for use in an editor, it has special
    features for scanning and parsing text as well as features for handling
    files, buffers, displays, subprocesses, and so on.  Emacs Lisp is
    closely integrated with the editing facilities; thus, editing commands
    are functions that can also conveniently be called from Lisp programs,
    and parameters for customization are ordinary Lisp variables.

    This manual describes Emacs Lisp.  Generally speaking, the earlier
    chapters describe features of Emacs Lisp that have counterparts in
    many programming languages, and later chapters describe features that
    are peculiar to Emacs Lisp or relate specifically to editing.

    \vfil

    \leftskip=0pt
    \rightskip=0pt

    \parfillskip=0pt\hfil%
    ISBN-1-882114-04-3

    \vskip.5in
  }%
  \setbox0=\vbox to1in{
    \vfil\hskip.5in
    {\price FSF $\bullet$ US\$25.00 $\bullet$ Printed in USA}
    \vskip.5in
  }%
  \rotl0%
}

\eject\bye

@ignore
   arch-tag: e1830f4c-dc4a-4314-b706-a03c7e93f022
@end ignore
