\input texinfo
@c %**start of header
@c @setfilename org
@setfilename ../info/org
@settitle Org Mode Manual

@set VERSION 3.12
@set DATE June 2005

@dircategory Emacs
@direntry
* Org Mode: (org).	Outline-based notes management and organizer
@end direntry

@c Version and Contact Info
@set MAINTAINERSITE @uref{http://www.astro.uva.nl/~dominik/Tools/org/,maintainers webpage}
@set MAINTAINER Carsten Dominik
@set MAINTAINEREMAIL @email{dominik@@science.uva.nl}
@set MAINTAINERCONTACT @uref{mailto:dominik@@science.uva.nl,contact the maintainer}
@c %**end of header
@finalout

@c Macro definitions

@c Subheadings inside a table.  Need a difference between info and the rest.
@macro tsubheading{text}
@ifinfo
@subsubheading \text\
@end ifinfo
@ifnotinfo
@item @b{\text\}
@end ifnotinfo
@end macro

@copying
This manual is for Org-mode (version @value{VERSION}).

Copyright @copyright{} 2004, 2005 Free Software Foundation

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.1 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, with the Front-Cover texts being ``A GNU Manual,''
and with the Back-Cover Texts as in (a) below.  A copy of the
license is included in the section entitled ``GNU Free Documentation
License.''

(a) The FSF's Back-Cover Text is: ``You have freedom to copy and modify
this GNU Manual, like GNU software.  Copies published by the Free
Software Foundation raise funds for GNU development.''
@end quotation
@end copying

@titlepage
@title Org Mode Manual

@subtitle Release @value{VERSION}
@author by Carsten Dominik

@c The following two commands start the copyright page.
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@c Output the table of contents at the beginning.
@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top, Introduction, (dir), (dir)
@top Org Mode Manual

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Introduction::                Getting started
* Document Structure::          A tree works like your brain
* Tables::                      Pure magic for quick formatting
* Hyperlinks::                  Notes in context
* TODO items::                  Every tree branch can be a TODO item
* Timestamps::                  Assign date and time to items
* Timeline and Agenda::         Use time-stamped items to produce an agenda
* Exporting::                   Sharing and publishing of notes
* Miscellaneous::               All the rest which did not fit elsewhere
* Index::                       The fast road to specific information
* Key Index::                   Key bindings and where they are described

@detailmenu
 --- The Detailed Node Listing ---

Introduction

* Summary::                     Brief summary of what Org-mode does
* Installation and Activation::  How to install Org-mode
* Feedback::                    Bug reportes, ideas, patches etc.

Document Structure

* Outlines::                    Org-mode is based on outline-mode
* Headlines::                   How to typeset org-tree headlines
* Visibility cycling::          Show ad hide, much simplified
* Motion::                      Jumping to other headlines
* Structure editing::           Changing sequence and level of headlines
* Archiving::                   Move done task trees to a different place
* Sparse trees::                Matches embedded in context

Tables

* Built-in table editor::       Simple tables
* Table calculations::          Compute a field from other fields
* orgtbl-mode::                 The table editor as minor mode
* table.el::                    Complex tables

Calculations in tables

* Formula syntax::              How to write a formula
* Applying a formula::          How to get a formula executed
* Recalculation::               Re-applying all formulas in a table
* Summing::                     Summing columns and rows

Hyperlinks

* Links::                       URL-like links to the world
* Remember::                    Org-trees store quick notes

TODO items

* TODO basics::                 Marking and displaying TODO entries
* TODO extensions::             Workflow and assignments
* Priorities::                  Some things are more important than others

Extended use of TODO keywords

* Workflow states::             From TODO to DONE in steps
* TODO types::                  I do this, Fred the rest
* Per file keywords::           Different files, different requirements

Timestamps

* Time stamps::                 Assigning a time to a tree entry
* Creating timestamps::         Commands which insert timestamps

Timeline and Agenda

* Timeline::                    Time-sorted view for single file
* Agenda::                      Your weekly planner
* Agenda commands::             Remote editing of org trees
* Calendar/Diary integration::  Integrating Anniversaries and more

Calendar/Diary integration

* Diary to agenda::             Agenda incorporates the diary
* Agenda to diary::             Diary incorporates the agenda

Exporting

* Export commands::             Commands which export and display
* HTML formatting::             Interpretation of the buffer content
* Export options::              How to influence exports
* Comment lines::               Lines which will not be exported

Miscellaneous

* Completion::                  M-TAB knows what you need
* Customization::               Adapting Org-mode to your taste
* FAQ::                         Frequently asked questions
* Interaction::                 Other Emacs packages
* Bugs::                        Things which do not work perfectly
* Acknowledgments::             These people provided feedback and more

@end detailmenu
@end menu

@node Introduction, Document Structure, Top, Top
@chapter Introduction
@cindex introduction

@menu
* Summary::                     Brief summary of what Org-mode does
* Installation and Activation::  How to install Org-mode
* Feedback::                    Bug reportes, ideas, patches etc.
@end menu

@node Summary, Installation and Activation, Introduction, Introduction
@section Summary
@cindex summary

Org-mode is a mode for keeping notes, maintaining ToDo lists, and doing
project planning with a fast and effective plain-text system.

Org-mode develops organizational tasks around NOTES files that contain
information about projects as plain text.  Org-mode is implemented on
top of outline-mode, which makes it possible to keep the content of
large files well structured.  Visibility cycling and structure editing
help to work with the tree.  Tables are easily created with a built-in
table editor.  Org-mode supports ToDo items, deadlines, time stamps,
and scheduling.  It dynamically compiles entries into an agenda that
utilizes and smoothly integrates much of the Emacs calendar and diary.
Plain text URL-like links connect to websites, emails, usenet
messages, BBDB entries, and any files related to the projects.  For
printing and sharing of notes, an Org-mode file can be exported as a
structured ASCII file, or as HTML.

Org-mode keeps simple things simple.  Not every outline branch needs
to be an action item, not every action item needs to have priority or
scheduling information associated with it.  Org-mode can be used on
different levels and in different ways, for example

@example
@r{@bullet{} as an outline extension with visibility cycling and structure editing}
@r{@bullet{} as an ASCII system and table editor to take structured notes}
@r{@bullet{} as an ASCII table editor with some spreadsheet-like capabilities}
@r{@bullet{} as a simple hypertext system, with HTML export}
@r{@bullet{} as a TODO list editor}
@r{@bullet{} as a full agenda and planner with deadlines and work scheduling}
@end example

The Org-mode table editor can be integrated into any major mode by
activating the minor Orgtbl-mode.

There is a website for Org-mode which provides links to the newest
version of Org-mode, as well as additional information, screen shots
and example files.  This page is located at
@uref{http://www.astro.uva.nl/~dominik/Tools/org/}.

@page

@node Installation and Activation, Feedback, Summary, Introduction
@section Installation and Activation
@cindex installation
@cindex autoload
@cindex global keybindings
@cindex keybindings, global

If Org-mode is part of the Emacs distribution or an XEmacs package,
you only need to copy the following lines to your @file{.emacs} file.
The last two lines define @emph{global} keys for the commands
@command{org-store-link} and @command{org-agenda} - please choose
suitable keys yourself.

@lisp
;; The following lines are always needed.  Choose your own keys.
(add-to-list 'auto-mode-alist '("\\.org$" . org-mode))
(define-key global-map "\C-cl" 'org-store-link)
(define-key global-map "\C-ca" 'org-agenda)
@end lisp

If you have downloaded Org-mode from the Web, you must byte-compile
@file{org.el} and put it on your load path.  In addition to the Emacs
Lisp lines above, you also need to add the following lines to
@file{.emacs}:

@lisp
;; These lines only if org-mode is not part of the X/Emacs distribution.
(autoload 'org-mode "org" "Org mode" t)
(autoload 'org-diary "org" "Diary entries from Org mode")
(autoload 'org-agenda "org" "Multi-file agenda from Org mode" t)
(autoload 'org-store-link "org" "Store a link to the current location" t)
(autoload 'orgtbl-mode "org" "Org tables as a minor mode" t)
(autoload 'turn-on-orgtbl "org" "Org tables as a minor mode")
@end lisp

@cindex org-mode, turning on
With this setup, all files with extension @samp{.org} will be put into
Org-mode.  As an alternative, make the first line of a file look like
this:

@example
MY PROJECTS    -*- mode: org; -*-
@end example

@noindent which will select Org-mode for this buffer no matter what
the file's name is.  See also the variable
@code{org-insert-mode-line-in-empty-file'}.

@node Feedback,  , Installation and Activation, Introduction
@section Feedback
@cindex feedback
@cindex bug reports
@cindex maintainer
@cindex author

If you find problems with Org-mode, or if you have questions, remarks,
or ideas about it, please contact the maintainer Carsten Dominik at
@value{MAINTAINEREMAIL}.

For bug reports, please provide as much information as possible,
including the version information of Emacs (@kbd{C-h v emacs-version
@key{RET}}) and Org-mode (@kbd{M-x org-version}), as well as the
Org-mode related setup in @file{.emacs}.  If an error occurs, a
traceback can be very useful.  Often a small example file helps, along
with clear information about:
@enumerate
@item What exactly did you do?
@item What did you expect to happen?
@item What happened instead?
@end enumerate
@noindent Thanks for helping to improve this mode.

@node Document Structure, Tables, Introduction, Top
@chapter Document Structure
@cindex document structure
@cindex structure of document

Org-mode is based on outline mode and provides flexible commands to
edit the structure of the document.

@menu
* Outlines::                    Org-mode is based on outline-mode
* Headlines::                   How to typeset org-tree headlines
* Visibility cycling::          Show ad hide, much simplified
* Motion::                      Jumping to other headlines
* Structure editing::           Changing sequence and level of headlines
* Archiving::                   Move done task trees to a different place
* Sparse trees::                Matches embedded in context
@end menu

@node Outlines, Headlines, Document Structure, Document Structure
@section Outlines
@cindex outlines
@cindex outline-mode

Org-mode is implemented on top of outline-mode.  Outlines allow to
organize a document in a hierarchical structure, which (at least for
me) is the best representation of notes and thoughts.  Overview over
this structure is achieved by folding (hiding) large parts of the
document to show only the general document structure and the parts
currently being worked on.  Org-mode greatly simplifies the use of
outlines by compressing the entire show/hide functionality into a
single command @command{org-cycle}, which is bound to the @key{TAB}
key.

@node Headlines, Visibility cycling, Outlines, Document Structure
@section Headlines
@cindex headlines
@cindex outline tree

Headlines define the structure of an outline tree.  The Headlines in
Org-mode start with one or more stars, for example

@example
* Top level headline
** Second level
*** 3rd level
    some text
*** 3rd level
    more text
* Another top level headline
@end example

@node Visibility cycling, Motion, Headlines, Document Structure
@section Visibility cycling
@cindex visibility cycling
@cindex trees, visibility

Outlines make it possible to hide parts of the text in the buffer.
Org-mode uses a single command bound to the @key{TAB} key to change
the visibility in the buffer.

@cindex subtree visibility states
@cindex folded, subtree visibility state
@cindex children, subtree visibility state
@cindex subtree, subtree visibility state
@table @kbd
@kindex @key{TAB}
@item @key{TAB}
Rotate current subtree between the states
@example
,-> FOLDED -> CHILDREN -> SUBTREE --.
'-----------------------------------'
@end example
At the beginning of the buffer (or when called with @kbd{C-u}), this does
the same as the command @kbd{S-@key{TAB}} below.

@cindex global visibility states
@cindex overview, global visibility state
@cindex contents, global visibility state
@cindex show all, global visibility state
@kindex S-@key{TAB}
@item S-@key{TAB}
Rotate the entire buffer between the states
@example
,-> OVERVIEW -> CONTENTS -> SHOW ALL --.
'--------------------------------------'
@end example
Note that inside tables, @kbd{S-@key{TAB}} jumps to the previous field.

@cindex show all, command
@kindex C-c C-a
@item C-c C-a
Show all.
@end table

When Emacs first visits an Org-mode file, the global state is set to
OVERVIEW, i.e. only the top level headlines are visible.  This can be
configured through the variable @code{org-startup-folded}, or on a
per-file basis by adding one of the following lines anywhere in the
buffer:

@example
#+STARTUP: fold
#+STARTUP: nofold
#+STARTUP: content
@end example

@node Motion, Structure editing, Visibility cycling, Document Structure
@section Motion
@cindex motion, between headlines
@cindex jumping, to headlines
The following commands jump to other headlines in the buffer.

@table @kbd
@kindex C-c C-n
@item C-c C-n
Next heading.
@kindex C-c C-p
@item C-c C-p
Previous heading.
@kindex C-c C-f
@item C-c C-f
Next heading same level.
@kindex C-c C-b
@item C-c C-b
Previous heading same level.
@kindex C-c C-u
@item C-c C-u
Backward to higher level heading.
@kindex C-c C-j
@item C-c C-j
Jump to a different place without changing the current outline
visibility.  Shows the document structure in a temporary buffer, where
you can use visibility cycling (@key{TAB}) to find your destination.
After pressing @key{RET}, the cursor moves to the selected location in
the original buffer, and the headings hierarchy above it is made
visible.
@end table

@node Structure editing, Archiving, Motion, Document Structure
@section Structure editing
@cindex structure editing
@cindex headline, promotion and demotion
@cindex promotion, of subtrees
@cindex demotion, of subtrees
@cindex subtree, cut and paste
@cindex pasting, of subtrees
@cindex cutting, of subtrees
@cindex copying, of subtrees

@table @kbd
@kindex M-@key{RET}
@item M-@key{RET}
Insert new heading with same level as current
@kindex M-S-@key{RET}
@item M-S-@key{RET}
Insert new TODO entry with same level as current heading.
@kindex M-@key{left}
@item M-@key{left}
Promote current heading by one level
@kindex M-@key{right}
@item M-@key{right}
Demote current heading by one level
@kindex M-S-@key{left}
@item M-S-@key{left}
Promote the current subtree by one level
@kindex M-S-@key{right}
@item M-S-@key{right}
Demote the current subtree by one level
@kindex M-S-@key{up}
@item M-S-@key{up}
Move subtree up (swap with previous subtree of same level)
@kindex M-S-@key{down}
@item M-S-@key{down}
Move subtree down (swap with next subtree of same level)
@kindex C-c C-h C-w
@item C-c C-h C-w
Kill subtree, i.e. remove it from buffer but save in kill ring.
@kindex C-c C-h M-w
@item C-c C-h M-w
Copy subtree to kill ring.
@kindex C-c C-h C-y
@item C-c C-h C-y
Yank subtree from kill ring.  This does modify the level of the subtree to
make sure the tree fits in nicely at the yank position.  The yank
level can also be specified with a prefix arg, or by yanking after a
headline marker like @samp{****}.
@end table

@cindex region, active
@cindex active region
@cindex transient-mark-mode
When there is an active region (transient-mark-mode), promotion and
demotion work on all headlines in the region.  To select a region of
headlines, it is best to place both point and mark at the beginning of a
line, mark at the beginning of the first headline, and point at the line
just after the last headline to change.  Note that when the cursor is
inside a table (@pxref{Tables}), the Meta-Cursor keys have different
functionality.

@node Archiving, Sparse trees, Structure editing, Document Structure
@section Archiving
@cindex archiving

When a project represented by a (sub)tree is finished, you may want
to move the tree to an archive place, either in the same file under a
special top-level heading, or even to a different file.
@table @kbd
@kindex C-c $
@item @kbd{C-c $}
Archive the subtree starting at the cursor position to the location
given by @code{org-archive-location}.
@end table

@cindex archive locations
The default archive is a file in the same directory as the current
file, with the name derived by appending @file{_archive} to the
current file name.  For information and examples on how to change
this, see the documentation string of the variable
@code{org-archive-location}.  If you are also using the Org-mode
agenda, archiving to a different file is a good way to keep archived
trees from contributing agenda items.

@node Sparse trees,  , Archiving, Document Structure
@section Sparse trees
@cindex sparse trees
@cindex trees, sparse
@cindex folding, sparse trees
@cindex occur, command

An important feature of Org-mode is the ability to construct
@emph{sparse trees} for selected information in an outline tree.  A
sparse tree means that the entire document is folded as much as
possible, but the selected information is made visible along with the
headline structure above it@footnote{See also the variable
@code{org-show-following-heading}.}.  Just try it out and you will see
immediately how it works.

Org-mode contains several commands creating such trees.  The most
basic one is @command{org-occur}:

@table @kbd
@kindex C-c /
@item C-c /
Occur.  Prompts for a regexp and shows a sparse tree with all matches.
If the match is in a headline, the headline is made visible.  If the
match is in the body of an entry, headline and body are made visible.
In order to provide minimal context, also the full hierarchy of
headlines above the match is shown, as well as the headline following
the match.
@end table

Other commands are using this feature as well.  For example @kbd{C-c
C-v} creates a sparse TODO tree (@pxref{TODO basics}).

@kindex C-c C-x v
@cindex printing sparse trees
@cindex visible text, printing
To print a sparse tree, you can use the Emacs command
@code{ps-print-buffer-with-faces} which does not print invisible parts
of the document @footnote{This does not work under XEmacs, because
XEmacs uses selective display for outlining, not text properties}.
Or you can use the command @kbd{C-c C-x v} to copy the visible part of
the document to another file (extension @file{.txt}) which then can be
printed in any desired way.

@node Tables, Hyperlinks, Document Structure, Top
@chapter Tables
@cindex tables

Org-mode has a very fast and intuitive table editor built-in.
Spreadsheet-like calculations are supported in connection with the
Emacs @file{calc} package.

@menu
* Built-in table editor::       Simple tables
* Table calculations::          Compute a field from other fields
* orgtbl-mode::                 The table editor as minor mode
* table.el::                    Complex tables
@end menu

@node Built-in table editor, Table calculations, Tables, Tables
@section The built-in table editor
@cindex table editor, builtin

Org-mode makes it easy to format tables in plain ASCII.  Any line with
@samp{|} as the first non-white character is considered part of a
table.  @samp{|} is also the column separator.  A table might look
like this:

@example
| Name  | Phone | Age |
|-------+-------+-----|
| Peter |  1234 |  17 |
| Anna  |  4321 |  25 |
@end example

A table is re-aligned automatically each time you press @key{TAB} or
@key{RET} or @kbd{C-c C-c} inside the table.  @key{TAB} also moves to
the next field (@key{RET} to the next row) and creates new table rows
at the end of the table or before horizontal lines.  The indentation
of the table is set by the first line.  Any line starting with
@samp{|-} is considered as a horizontal separator line and will be
expanded on the next re-align to span the whole table width.  So, to
create the above table, you would only type

@example
|Name|Phone|Age
|-
@end example

@noindent and then press @key{TAB} to align the table and start filling in
fields.

@table @kbd
@tsubheading{Creation and conversion}
@item M-x org-table-create
Creates an empty Org-mode table.  However, it is much easier to just
start typing, like @kbd{|Name|Phone|Age @key{RET} |- @key{TAB}}

@kindex C-c C-c
@item C-c C-c
Convert region to table.  Works when the cursor is not in an existing
table, and when there is a region defined.  If every line contains at
least one TAB character, the function assumes that the material is tab
separated.  If not, lines are split at whitespace into fields.  You
can use a prefix argument to indicate how many consecutive spaces are
at least required to indicate a field separator (default: just one).

@tsubheading{Re-aligning and field motion}
@kindex C-c C-c
@item C-c C-c
Re-align the table without moving the cursor.

@kindex @key{TAB}
@item @key{TAB}
Re-align the table, move to the next field.  Creates a new row if
necessary.

@kindex S-@key{TAB}
@item S-@key{TAB}
Re-align, move to previous field.

@kindex @key{RET}
@item @key{RET}
Re-align the table and move down to next row.  Creates a new row if
necessary.  At the beginning or end of a line, @key{RET} still does
NEWLINE, so it can be used to split a table.

@tsubheading{Column and row editing}
@kindex M-@key{left}
@kindex M-@key{right}
@item M-@key{left}
@itemx M-@key{right}
Move the current column left/right

@kindex M-S-@key{left}
@item M-S-@key{left}
Kill the current column.

@kindex M-S-@key{right}
@item M-S-@key{right}
Insert a new column to the left of the cursor position.

@kindex M-@key{up}
@kindex M-@key{down}
@item M-@key{up}
@itemx M-@key{down}
Move the current row up/down

@kindex M-S-@key{up}
@item M-S-@key{up}
Kill the current row or horizontal line.

@kindex M-S-@key{down}
@item M-S-@key{down}
Insert a new row above (with arg: below) the current row.

@kindex C-c -
@item C-c -
Insert a horizontal line below current row. With prefix arg, the line
is created above the current line.

@tsubheading{Regions}
@kindex C-c C-h M-w
@item C-c C-h M-w
Copy a rectangular region from a table to a special clipboard.  Point
and mark determine edge fields of the rectangle.  The process ignores
horizontal separator lines.
@kindex C-c C-h C-w
@item C-c C-h C-w
Copy a rectangular region from a table to a special clipboard, and
blank all fields in the rectangle.  So this is the ``cut'' operation.
@kindex C-c C-h C-y
@item C-c C-h C-y
Paste a rectangular region into a table.
The upper right corner ends up in the current field.  All involved fields
will be overwritten.  If the rectangle does not fit into the present table,
the table is enlarged as needed.  The process ignores horizontal separator
lines.
@kindex C-c C-q
@item C-c C-q
Wrap several fields in a column like a paragraph.  If there is an active
region, and both point and mark are in the same column, the text in the
column is wrapped to minimum width for the given number of lines.  A
prefix ARG may be used to change the number of desired lines.  If there
is no region, the current field is split at the cursor position and the
text fragment to the right of the cursor is prepended to the field one
line down. If there is no region, but you specify a prefix ARG, the
current field gets blank, and the content is appended to the field
above.

@tsubheading{Calculations}
@cindex formula, in tables
@cindex calculations, in tables
@kindex C-c =
@item C-c =
Replace current field with the result of a formula.  When called with a
@kbd{C-u} prefix, apply the equation in the current field and down
through the current column to a horizonal separator line or the end of
the table.  For details, see @ref{Table calculations}.

@kindex C-c *
@item C-c *
Recalculate the current row by applying the stored formulas from left
to right.  When called with a @kbd{C-u} prefix, recalculate the
entire table, starting with the first non-header line (i.e. below the
first horizontal separator line).  For details, see @ref{Table calculations}.

@kindex C-#
@item C-#
Rotate the recalculation mark in first column through the states
@samp{}, @samp{#}, @samp{*}, @samp{!}, @samp{$}.  For the meaning of
these marks see @ref{Table calculations}.  When there is an active
region, change all marks in the region.

@kindex C-c ?
@item C-c ?
Which table column is the cursor in?  Displays number >0 in echo
area.

@cindex region, active
@cindex active region
@cindex transient-mark-mode
@kindex C-c +
@item C-c +
Sum the numbers in the current column, or in the rectangle defined by
the active region.  The result is shown in the echo area and can
be inserted with @kbd{C-y}.

@kindex S-@key{RET}
@item S-@key{RET}
When current field is empty, copy from first non-empty field above.
When not empty, copy current field down to next row and move cursor
along with it.  Depending on the variable
@code{org-table-copy-increment}, integer field values will be
incremented during copy.  This key is also used by CUA-mode
(@pxref{Interaction}).

@tsubheading{Miscellaneous}
@kindex C-c |
@item C-c |
Toggle the visibility of vertical lines in tables.  The lines are
still there, only made invisible with a text property.  Any @samp{|}
added by hand will become invisible on the next align.

@item M-x org-table-import
Import a file as a table.  The table should be TAB- or whitespace
separated.  Useful for example to import an Excel table or data from a
database, because these programs generally can write TAB-separated text
files.  This command works by inserting the file into the buffer and
then converting the region to a table.  Any prefix argument is passed on
to the converter, which uses it to determine the separator.

@item M-x org-table-export
Export the table as a TAB-separated file.  Useful for data exchange with
for example Excel or database programs.

@end table

If you don't like the automatic table editor because it gets into your
way in lines which you would like to start with @samp{|}, you can turn
it off with
@lisp
(setq org-enable-table-editor nil)
@end lisp
@noindent The only table command which then still works is
@kbd{C-c C-c} to do a manual re-align.

@node Table calculations, orgtbl-mode, Built-in table editor, Tables
@section Calculations in tables
@cindex calculations, in tables

While the Org-mode table editor misses many features of a full
spreadsheet, it nevertheless has very useful capabilities to compute
fields.  In horizontal direction, it can use complex expressions to
compute a field from other fields @emph{in the same row}, using named
columns, constants and parameters.  The Emacs @file{calc} package is
required for this feature to work.  In vertical direction, only
summing is supported.

@menu
* Formula syntax::              How to write a formula
* Applying a formula::          How to get a formula executed
* Recalculation::               Re-applying all formulas in a table
* Summing::                     Summing columns and rows
@end menu

@node Formula syntax, Applying a formula, Table calculations, Table calculations
@subsection Formula syntax

A formula for horizontal computations can be any algebraic expression
understood by the Emacs @file{calc} package.  Before evaluation,
variable substitution takes place: @samp{$} is replaced by the field
the cursor is currently in, and $1..$n reference the fields in the
current row.  @samp{$name} is interpreted as the name of a column,
parameter or constant.  Constants are defined globally through the
variable @code{org-table-formula-constants}.  If you have the
@file{constants.el} package, it will also be used to resolve
constants, including natural constants like @samp{$k} for Plancks
constant, units like @samp{$km} for kilometers.  Column names and
parameters can be specified in special table lines.  These are
described below, see @ref{Recalculation}.

A formula can contain an optional mode string after a semicolon.  This
string consists of flags to influence calc's modes@footnote{By
default, Org-mode uses the standard calc modes (precision 12, angular
units degrees, fraction and symbolic modes off).  However, the display
format which has been changed to @code{(float 5)} to keep tables
compact.  The default settings can be configured using the variable
@code{org-calc-default-modes}.} during execution, e.g.  @samp{p20} to
switch the internal precision to 20 digits, @samp{n3}, @samp{s3},
@samp{e2} or @samp{f4} to switch to normal, scientific, engineering,
or fix display format, respectively, and @samp{D}, @samp{R}, @samp{F},
and @samp{S} to turn on degrees, radians, fraction and symbolic modes,
respectively.  In addition, you may provide a @code{printf} specifier
to reformat the final result.  A few examples:
@example
  $1+$2                @r{Sum of first and second field}
  $1+$2;%.2f           @r{Same, format result to two decimals}
  exp($2)+exp($1)      @r{Math functions can be used}
  $;%.1f               @r{Reformat current cell to 1 decimal}
  ($3-32)*5/9          @r{degrees F -> C conversion}
  $c/$1/$cm            @r{Hz -> cm conversion, using @file{constants.el}}
  tan($1);Dp3s1        @r{compute in degrees, precision 3, display SCI 1}
  vmean($2..$7)        @r{compute column range mean, using vector function}
  taylor($3,x=7,2)     @r{taylor series of $3, at x=7, second degree}
@end example

@node Applying a formula, Recalculation, Formula syntax, Table calculations
@subsection Applying a formula

To apply a formula to a field, type it directly into the field,
preceded by an equal sign, like @samp{=$1+$2}.  When you press
@key{TAB} or @key{RET} or @kbd{C-c C-c} with the cursor still in the
field, the formula will be evaluated and replaced with the result.  If
the field contains only @samp{=}, the formula most recently applied
anywhere in the @emph{same column} will be used.

For each column, Org-mode will remember the most recently used
formula.  The information is stored in a special line directly below
the table.  When adding/deleting/moving columns with the appropriate
commands, the stored equations will be modified accordingly.  When a
column used in a calculation is removed, references to this column
become invalid and will cause an error upon applying the equation.

Instead of typing an equation into the field, you may also use the
command @kbd{C-c =}.  It prompts for a formula (with default taken
from the @samp{#+TBLFM:} line) and applies it to the current field.
If you use a prefix argument (i.e. @kbd{C-u C-c =}), the formula will
be applied to the current field and down to the next separator line
or the end of the table.  A numerical prefix will apply it to that
many fields in the current column.

When the evaluation of a formula leads to an error, the field content
becomes the string @samp{#ERROR}.  If you would like see what is going
on during variable substitution and calculation in order to find a
bug, turn on formula debugging in the menu and repeat the calculation
by pressing, for example by pressing @kbd{C-c = @key{RET}} in a field.
Detailed information will be displayed.

@node Recalculation, Summing, Applying a formula, Table calculations
@subsection Recalculation

To recompute all the fields in a line, use the command @kbd{C-c *}.
It re-applies all stored equations to the current row, from left to
right.  With a @kbd{C-u} prefix, this will be done to every line in
the table, so use this command it you want to make sure the entire
table is up-to-date.  A more automatic way of recalculating the
current line requires marking the line: If the first column of a row
contains only @samp{#}, the row will be re-computed with every
@key{TAB}, @key{RET}, and @kbd{C-c C-c} in this row.  Here is an
example of a table that collects exam results of students, with some
rows activated for semi-automatic computations.

@example
@group
|---+---------+--------+--------+--------+-------+------|
|   | Student | Prob 1 | Prob 2 | Prob 3 | Total | Note |
|---+---------+--------+--------+--------+-------+------|
| ! |         |     P1 |     P2 |     P3 |   Tot |      |
| # | Maximum |     10 |     15 |     25 |    50 | 10.0 |
|---+---------+--------+--------+--------+-------+------|
| # | Peter   |     10 |      8 |     23 |    41 |  8.2 |
| # | Sara    |      7 |     14 |     19 |    40 |  8.0 |
| # | Sam     |      2 |      4 |      3 |     9 |  1.8 |
|---+---------+--------+--------+--------+-------+------|
| $ | max=50  |        |        |        |       |      |
|---+---------+--------+--------+--------+-------+------|
#+TBLFM: $6=vsum($P1..$P3)::$7=10*$Tot/$max;%.1f
@end group
@end example
@noindent
The example also demonstrates a number of convenience features:
@enumerate
@item
If the first field of a row contains only @samp{!}, this row defines
@emph{names} for the different columns so that you can write
@samp{$Tot} instead of @samp{$6} --- useful in larger tables,
when counting columns becomes error prone.
@item
If the first field of a row contains only @samp{$}, fields in this row
can define @emph{parameters} for formulas.  For example, if a field in
a @samp{$} row contains @samp{max=50}, then formulas in this table can
refer to the value 50 using @samp{$max}.  Parameters work exactly like
constants, only that they can be defined on a per-table basis.
Changing a parameter and then recalculating the table can be useful
and fun.
@item
A column range @samp{$P1..$P3} is expanded to a vector, so that calc's
vector functions (in this case @samp{vsum}, but there are many more)
can be applied to ranges.  For a range, columns may be referenced by
name or number, in either sequence.
@end enumerate

@noindent If a table contains any line with @samp{#} as the
first field, @kbd{C-u C-c *} will only change the marked lines and
leave all unmarked lines alone.  You can also mark a line with
@samp{*}.  These lines will also be recalculated with @kbd{C-u C-c *},
but not upon @key{TAB} and @key{RET}.  Use this for lines which are
slow to calculate.

Just to wet your appetite on what can be done with the fantastic
@file{calc} package, here is a table that computes the Taylor series
for a couple of functions (homework: try that with Excel :-)

@example
@group
|---+-------------+---+-----+--------------------------------------|
|   | Func        | n | x   | Result                               |
|---+-------------+---+-----+--------------------------------------|
| # | exp(x)      | 1 | x   | 1 + x                                |
| # | exp(x)      | 2 | x   | 1 + x + x^2 / 2                      |
| # | exp(x)      | 3 | x   | 1 + x + x^2 / 2 + x^3 / 6            |
| # | x^2+sqrt(x) | 2 | x=0 | x*(0.5 / 0) + x^2 (2 - 0.25 / 0) / 2 |
| # | x^2+sqrt(x) | 2 | x=1 | 2 + 2.5 x - 2.5 + 0.875 (x - 1)^2    |
| * | tan(x)      | 3 | x   | 0.0175 x + 1.77e-6 x^3               |
|---+-------------+---+-----+--------------------------------------|
#+TBLFM: $5=taylor($2,$4,$3);n3
@end group
@end example

@node Summing,  , Recalculation, Table calculations
@subsection Summing

Finally, when typing a formula into a field, a number of special
keywords execute predefined sums over the current row or column and
enter the result into the current field.  These calculations are
one-off, the formula is not stored, and you will neet to re-enter it
in order to compute again.

@example
=       @r{Execute the stored formula valid in this column.}
=sum    @r{Sum all fields above the current (alias @code{=sumv}).}
=sumh   @r{Sum all fields to the left of the current field.}
=sum3   @r{Same as @samp{=sum}, but use just 3 fields above current.}
@end example

@node orgtbl-mode, table.el, Table calculations, Tables
@section The Orgtbl minor mode
@cindex orgtbl-mode
@cindex minor mode for tables

If you like the intuitive way the Org-mode table editor works, you
might want to use it also in other modes like text-mode or mail-mode.
The minor mode Orgtbl-mode makes this possible.  You can always toggle
the mode with @kbd{M-x orgtbl-mode}.  To turn it on by default, for
example in mail mode, use
@lisp
(add-hook 'mail-mode-hook 'turn-on-orgtbl)
@end lisp

@node table.el,  , orgtbl-mode, Tables
@section The @file{table.el} package
@kindex C-c C-c
@cindex table editor, @file{table.el}
@cindex @file{table.el}

Complex ASCII tables with automatic line wrapping, column- and
row-spanning, and alignment can be created using the Emacs table
package by Takaaki Ota (@uref{http://sourceforge.net/projects/table}).
When @key{TAB} or @kbd{C-c C-c} is pressed in such a table, Org-mode
will call @command{table-recognize-table} and move the cursor into the
table.  Inside a table, the keymap of Org-mode is inactive.  In order
to execute Org-mode-related commands, leave the table.

@table @kbd
@kindex C-c C-c
@item C-c C-c
Recognize @file{table.el} table.  Works when the cursor is in a
table.el table.

@kindex C-c ~
@item C-c ~
Insert a table.el table.  If there is already a table at point, this
command converts it between the table.el format and the Org-mode
format.  See the documentation string of the command
@code{org-convert-table} for the restrictions under which this is
possible.
@end table

@node Hyperlinks, TODO items, Tables, Top
@chapter Hyperlinks
@cindex hyperlinks

Just like HMTL, Org-mode provides links to other files, usenet
articles, emails and much more.

@menu
* Links::                       URL-like links to the world
* Remember::                    Org-trees store quick notes
@end menu

@node Links, Remember, Hyperlinks, Hyperlinks
@section Links
@cindex links
@cindex GNUS links
@cindex BBDB links
@cindex URL links
@cindex file links
@cindex VM links
@cindex RMAIL links
@cindex WANDERLUST links
@cindex USENET links
@cindex SHELL links

Org-mode supports links to files, websites, usenet and email messages;
and BBDB database entries.  Links are just plain-text URL-like
locators, optionally enclosed by angular brackets.  The following list
shows examples for each link type.

@example
<http://www.astro.uva.nl/~dominik>         @r{on the web}
<file:/home/dominik/images/jupiter.jpg>    @r{file, absolute path}
<file:papers/last.pdf>                     @r{file, relative path}
<file:~/code/main.c:255>                   @r{file, with line number}
<news:comp.emacs>                          @r{Usenet link}
<mailto:adent@@galaxy.net>                  @r{Mail link}
<vm:folder>                                @r{VM folder link}
<vm:folder#id>                             @r{VM message link}
<vm://myself@@some.where.org/folder#id>     @r{VM on remote machine}
<wl:folder>                                @r{WANDERLUST folder link}
<wl:folder#id>                             @r{WANDERLUST message link}
<rmail:folder>                             @r{RMAIL folder link}
<rmail:folder#id>                          @r{RMAIL message link}
<gnus:group>                               @r{GNUS group link}
<gnus:group#id>                            @r{GNUS article link}
<bbdb:Richard Stallman>                    @r{BBDB link}
<shell:ls *.org>@footnote{Note that @samp{<} and @samp{>} cannot be part of a link, and therefore of a shell command.  If you need redirection, use @@@{ and @@@} instead.}                          @r{A shell command}
@end example

A link may contain space characters and is terminated by @samp{>} or by
the end of a line.  In tables, the end of a table field also terminates
a link.  Angle brackets around a link are not required, but are
recommended to avoid problems with punctuation and other text following
the link.  See also the variable @code{org-allow-space-in-links}.

@cindex storing links
@table @kbd
@kindex C-c l
@item C-c l
Store a link to the current location.  This is a @emph{global} command
which can be used in any buffer to create a link.  The link will be
stored for later insertion into an Org-mode buffer (see below).  For VM,
RMAIL, WANDERLUST, GNUS and BBDB buffers, the link will point to the
current article/entry.  For W3 and W3M buffer, the link goes to the
current URL.  For any other files, the link will just point to the file.
The key binding @kbd{C-c l} is only a suggestion - see
@ref{Installation and Activation}.

@kindex C-c C-l
@cindex completion, of links
@cindex completion, of file names
@item C-c C-l
Insert a link.  This prompts for a link to be inserted into the
buffer.  You can just type a link, using one of the link type prefixes
mentioned in the examples above.  Through completion, all links stored
during the current session can be accessed.  When called with prefix
arg, you can use file name completion to enter a file link.  The link
will be formatted as given in the variable @code{org-link-format} and
inserted into the buffer.  Note that you don't have to use this
command to insert a link.  Links in Org-mode are plain text, and you
can type or paste them straight into the buffer.

@cindex inserting links
@kindex C-c C-o
@item C-c C-o
Open link at point.  This will launch a web browser for URLs (using
@command{browse-url-at-point}), run vm/gnus/bbdb for the corresponding
links, execute the command in a shell link, visit text files with
Emacs and select a suitable application for non-text files.
Classification of files is based on file extension only.  See option
@code{org-file-apps}.  If there is no link at point, the current
subtree will be searched for one.  If you want to override the default
application and visit the file with Emacs, use a @kbd{C-u} prefix.
If the cursor is on a time stamp, compiles the agenda for that date.

@strong{IMPORTANT}: Be careful not to use any dangerous commands in a
shell link.

@kindex mouse-2
@item mouse-2
On links, @kbd{mouse-2} will open the link just like @kbd{C-c C-o} would.

@kindex mouse-3
@item mouse-3
Like @kbd{mouse-2}, but force file links to be opened with Emacs.
@end table

@node Remember,  , Links, Hyperlinks
@section Remember
@cindex @file{remember.el}

Another way to create org entries with links to other files is through
the @emph{Remember} package by John Wiegley.  @emph{Remember} lets you
store quick notes with little interruption of your work flow.  See
@uref{http://www.emacswiki.org/cgi-bin/wiki/RememberMode} for more
information.  The notes produced by @emph{Remember} can be stored in
different ways, and Org-mode files are a good target.
Org-mode allows to file away notes either to a default file, or
directly to the correct location in your Org-mode outline tree.  The
following customization will tell @emph{Remember} to use org files as
target, and to create annotations compatible with Org-mode links.

@c FIXME: The autoload will not be necessary when Org-mode is part of Emacs
@example
(autoload 'org-remember-annotation "org")
(autoload 'org-remember-handler "org")
(setq org-directory "~/path/to/my/orgfiles/")
(setq org-default-notes-file "~/.notes")
(setq remember-annotation-functions '(org-remember-annotation))
(setq remember-handler-functions '(org-remember-handler))
@end example

When you compose a note with remember, you have to press @kbd{C-c C-c}
to exit remember-mode and to file away the note.  The handler first
prompts for a target file - if you press @key{RET}, the value of
@code{org-default-notes-file} is used.  Then the command offers the
headings tree of the selected file.  You can either immediately press
@key{RET} to get the note appended to the file.  Or you can use
vertical cursor motion (@key{up} and @key{down}) and visibility
cycling (@key{TAB}) to find a better place.  Pressing @key{RET} or
@key{left} or @key{right} leads to the following result.

@multitable @columnfractions 0.2 0.1 0.7
@item @b{Cursor position} @tab @b{Key} @tab @b{Note gets inserted}
@item buffer-start @tab @key{RET} @tab as level 2 heading at end of file
@item on headline @tab @key{RET} @tab as sublevel of the heading at cursor
@item             @tab @key{left}  @tab as same level, before current heading
@item             @tab @key{right} @tab as same level, after current heading
@item not on headline @tab @key{RET}
      @tab at cursor position, level taken from context.
           Or use prefix arg to specify level manually.
@end multitable

So a fast way to store the note is to press @kbd{C-c C-c @key{RET}
@key{RET}} to append it to the default file.  Even shorter would be
@kbd{C-u C-c C-c}, which does the same without even showing the tree.
But with little extra effort, you can push it directly to the correct
location.

Before inserting the text into a tree, the function ensures that the
text has a headline, i.e. a first line that starts with a @samp{*}.
If not, a headline is constructed from the current date and some
additional data.  If the variable @code{org-adapt-indentation} is
non-nil, the entire text is also indented so that it starts in the
same column as the headline (after the asterisks).

@node TODO items, Timestamps, Hyperlinks, Top
@chapter TODO items
@cindex TODO items

Org-mode does not maintain TODO lists as a separate document.  TODO
items are an integral part of the notes file, because TODO items
usually come up while taking notes!  With Org-mode, you simply mark
any entry in a tree as being a TODO item.  In this way, the
information is not duplicated, and the entire context from which the
item emerged is always present when you check.

Of course, this technique causes TODO items to be scattered throughout
your file.  Org-mode provides methods to give you an overview over all
things you have to do.

@menu
* TODO basics::                 Marking and displaying TODO entries
* TODO extensions::             Workflow and assignments
* Priorities::                  Some things are more important than others
@end menu

@node TODO basics, TODO extensions, TODO items, TODO items
@section Basic TODO functionality

Any headline can become a TODO item by starting it with the word TODO,
for example

@example
*** TODO Write letter to Sam Fortune
@end example

@noindent
The most important commands to work with TODO entries are:

@table @kbd
@kindex C-c C-t
@item C-c C-t
Rotate the TODO state of the current item between
@example
,-> (unmarked) -> TODO -> DONE --.
'--------------------------------'
@end example
The same rotation can also be done ``remotely'' from the timeline and
agenda buffers with the @kbd{t} command key (@pxref{Agenda commands}).
@kindex C-c C-v
@cindex sparse tree, for TODO
@item C-c C-v
View TODO items in a @emph{sparse tree} (@pxref{Sparse trees}).  Folds
the entire buffer, but shows all TODO items and the headings hierarchy
above them.  With prefix arg, show also the DONE entries.
@item C-u C-c a
A @kbd{C-u} argument to the @code{org-agenda command} (@pxref{Agenda})
collects all unfinished TODO items into a single place.
@end table

@node TODO extensions, Priorities, TODO basics, TODO items
@section Extended use of TODO keywords
@cindex extended TODO keywords

The default implementation of TODO entries is just two states:  TODO
and DONE.  You can, however, use the TODO feature for more
complicated things by configuring the variables
@code{org-todo-keywords} and @code{org-todo-interpretation}.  Using
special setup, you can even use TODO keywords in different ways in
different org files.

@menu
* Workflow states::             From TODO to DONE in steps
* TODO types::                  I do this, Fred the rest
* Per file keywords::           Different files, different requirements
@end menu

@node Workflow states, TODO types, TODO extensions, TODO extensions
@subsection TODO keywords as workflow states
@cindex TODO workflow
@cindex workflow states as TODO keywords

You can use TODO keywords to indicate different states in the process
of working on an item, for example

@lisp
(setq org-todo-keywords '("TODO" "FEEDBACK" "VERIFY" "DONE")
      org-todo-interpretation 'sequence)
@end lisp

@cindex completion, of TODO keywords
With this setup, the command @kbd{C-c C-t} will cycle an entry from
TODO to FEEDBACK, then to VERIFY, and finally too DONE.  You may also
use a prefix argument to quickly select a specific state.  For example
@kbd{C-3 C-c C-t} will change the state immediately to VERIFY.
If you define many keywords, you can use in-buffer completion (see
@ref{Completion}) to insert these words into the buffer.

@node TODO types, Per file keywords, Workflow states, TODO extensions
@subsection TODO keywords as types
@cindex TODO types
@cindex names as TODO keywords
@cindex types as TODO keywords

The second possibility is to use TODO keywords to indicate different
types of action items.  For example, you might want to indicate that
items are for ``work'' or ``home''.  Or, when you work with several
people on a single project, you might want to assign action items
directly to persons, by using their names as TODO keywords.  This
would be set up like this:

@lisp
(setq org-todo-keywords '("Fred" "Sara" "Lucy" "Mike" "DONE")
      org-todo-interpretation 'type)
@end lisp

In this case, different keywords do not indicate a sequence, but
rather different types.  So it is normally not useful to change from
one type to another.  Therefore, in this case the behavior of the
command @kbd{C-c C-t} is changed slightly@footnote{This is also true
for the @kbd{t} command in the timeline and agenda buffers.}.  When
used several times in succession, it will still cycle through all
names.  But when when you return to the item after some time and
execute @kbd{C-c C-t} again, it will switch from each name directly to
DONE.  Use prefix arguments or completion to quickly select a specific
name.

@node Per file keywords,  , TODO types, TODO extensions
@subsection Setting up TODO keywords for individual files
@cindex keyword options
@cindex per file keywords

It can be very useful to use different aspects of the TODO mechanism
in different files, which is not possible with the global settings
described above.  For file-local settings, you need to add special
lines to the file which set the keywords and interpretation for that
file only.  For example, to set one of the two examples discussed
above, you need one of the following lines, starting in column zero
anywhere in the file:

@example
#+SEQ_TODO: TODO FEEDBACK VERIFY DONE
#+TYP_TODO: Fred Sara Lucy Mike DONE
@end example

@cindex Completion, of option keywords
@kindex M-@key{TAB}
@noindent To make sure you are using the correct keyword, type
@samp{#+} into the buffer and then use @kbd{M-@key{TAB}} completion.

@cindex DONE, final TODO keyword
Remember that the last keyword must always mean that the item is DONE
(you may use a different word, though).  Also note that in each file,
only one of the two aspects of TODO keywords can be used.  After
changing one of these lines, use @kbd{C-c C-c} with the cursor still
in the line to make the changes known to Org-mode@footnote{Org-mode
parses these lines only when Org-mode is activated after visiting a
file.  @kbd{C-c C-c} with the cursor in a line starting with @samp{#-}
is simply restarting Org-mode, making sure that these changes will be
respected.}.

If you want to use very many keywords, for example when working with a
large group of people, you may split the names over several lines:

@example
#+TYP_TODO: Fred Sara Lucy Mike
#+TYP_TODO: Luis George Jules Jessica
#+TYP_TODO: Kim Arnold Peter
#+TYP_TODO: DONE
@end example

@node Priorities,  , TODO extensions, TODO items
@section Priorities
@cindex priorities

If you use Org-mode extensively to organize your work, you may end up
with a number of TODO entries so large that you'd like to prioritize
them.  This can be done by placing a @emph{priority cookie} into the
headline, like this

@example
*** TODO [#A] Write letter to Sam Fortune
@end example

@noindent
With its standard setup, Org-mode supports priorities @samp{A},
@samp{B}, and @samp{C}.  @samp{A} is the highest priority.  An entry
without a cookie is treated as priority @samp{B}.  Priorities make a
difference only in the agenda (@pxref{Agenda}).

@table @kbd
@kindex @kbd{C-c ,}
@item @kbd{C-c ,}
Set the priority of the current item.  The command prompts for a
priority character @samp{A}, @samp{B} or @samp{C}.  When you press
@key{SPC} instead, the priority cookie is removed from the headline.
The priorities can also be changed ``remotely'' from the timeline and
agenda buffer with the @kbd{,} command (@pxref{Agenda commands}).

@kindex S-@key{up}
@kindex S-@key{down}
@item S-@key{up}
@itemx S-@key{down}
Increase/decrease priority of current item.  Note that these keys are
also used to modify time stamps (@pxref{Creating timestamps}).
Furthermore, these keys are also used by CUA-mode
(@pxref{Interaction}).
@end table



@node Timestamps, Timeline and Agenda, TODO items, Top
@chapter Timestamps

Items can be labeled with timestamps to make them useful for project
planning.

@menu
* Time stamps::                 Assigning a time to a tree entry
* Creating timestamps::         Commands which insert timestamps
@end menu


@node Time stamps, Creating timestamps, Timestamps, Timestamps
@section Time stamps, deadlines and scheduling
@cindex time stamps
@cindex deadlines
@cindex scheduling

A time stamp is a specification of a date (possibly with time) in a
special format, either @samp{<2003-09-16 Tue>} or @samp{<2003-09-16
Tue 09:39>}.  A time stamp can appear anywhere in the headline or body
of an org-tree entry.  Its presence allows to show entries on specific
dates in the agenda (@pxref{Agenda}).  We distinguish:

@table @var
@cindex timestamp
@item TIMESTAMP
A simple time stamp just assigns a date/time to an item.  In the
timeline and agenda displays, the headline of the entry will be shown
exactly on that date.

@item TIMERANGE
@cindex timerange
Two time stamps connected by @samp{--} denote a time range.  The
headline will be shown on the first and last day of the range, and on
any dates that are displayed and fall in the range.  Here is an
example:

@example
** Meeting in Amsterdam
   <2004-08-23 Mon>--<2004-08-26 Thu>
@end example

@item DEADLINE
@cindex DEADLINE keyword
If a time stamp is preceded by the word @samp{DEADLINE:}, the task
(most likely a TODO item) is supposed to be finished on that date, and
it will be listed then.  In addition, the compilation for @emph{today}
will carry a warning about the approaching or missed deadline,
starting @code{org-deadline-warning-days} before the due date, and
continuing until the entry is marked DONE.  An example:

@example
*** TODO write article about the Earth for the Guide
    The editor in charge is <bbdb:Ford Prefect>
    DEADLINE: <2004-02-29 Sun>
@end example

@item SCHEDULED
@cindex DEADLINE keyword
If a time stamp is preceded by the word @samp{SCHEDULED:}, it means
you are planning to start working on that task on the given date.  The
headline will be listed under the given date.  In addition, a reminder
that the scheduled date has passed will be present in the compilation
for the @emph{today}, until the entry is marked DONE.  I.e., the
task will automatically be forwarded.
@end table

@node Creating timestamps,  , Time stamps, Timestamps
@section Creating timestamps
@cindex creating timestamps

For Org-mode to recognize time stamps, they need to be in the specific
format.  All commands listed below produce time stamps in the correct
format.

@table @kbd
@kindex C-c .
@item C-c .
Prompt for a date and insert a corresponding time stamp.  When the
cursor is at a previously used time stamp, it is updated to NOW.  When
this command is used twice in succession, a time range is inserted.

@kindex C-u C-c .
@item C-u C-c .
Like @kbd{C-c .}, but use the alternative format which contains date
and time.

@kindex C-c <
@item C-c <
Insert a time stamp corresponding to the cursor date in the Calendar.

@kindex C-c >
@item C-c >
Access the Emacs calendar for the current date.  If there is a
timestamp in the current line, goto the corresponding date
instead.

@kindex C-c C-o
@item C-c C-o
Access the agenda for the date given by the time stamp at point
(@pxref{Agenda}).

@kindex C-c C-d
@item C-c C-d
Insert @samp{DEADLINE} keyword along with a stamp.
@kindex C-c C-w
@cindex sparse tree, for deadlines
@item C-c C-w
Create a sparse tree with all deadlines that are either past-due, or
which will become due within @code{org-deadline-warning-days}.
With @kbd{C-u} prefix, show all deadlines in the file.  With a numeric
prefix, check that many days.  For example, @kbd{C-1 C-c C-w} shows
all deadlines due tomorrow.

@kindex C-c C-s
@item C-c C-s
Insert @samp{SCHEDULED} keyword along with a stamp.

@kindex S-@key{left}
@kindex S-@key{right}
@item S-@key{left}
@itemx S-@key{right}
Change date at cursor by one day.  These key bindings conflict with
CUA-mode (@pxref{Interaction}).

@kindex S-@key{up}
@kindex S-@key{down}
@item S-@key{up}
@itemx S-@key{down}
Change the item under the cursor in a timestamp.  The cursor can be on
a year, month, day, hour or minute.  Note that if the cursor is not at
a time stamp, these same keys modify the priority of an item.
(@pxref{Priorities}). The key bindings also conflict with CUA-mode
(@pxref{Interaction}).


@kindex C-c C-y
@cindex evaluate time range
@item C-c C-y
Evaluate a time range by computing the difference between start and
end.  With prefix arg, insert result after the time range (in a table:
into the following column).
@end table

@cindex date, reading in minibuffer
@cindex time, reading in minibuffer
@cindex calendar, for selecting date
When Org-mode prompts for a date/time, the function reading your input
will replace anything you choose not to specify with the current date
and time.  For details, see the documentation string of
@command{org-read-date}.  Also, a calender will pop up to allow
selecting a date.  The calendar can be fully controlled from the
minibuffer, and a date can be selected with the following commands:

@table @kbd
@kindex <
@item <
Scroll calendar backwards by one month.
@kindex >
@item >
Scroll calendar forwards by one month.
@kindex mouse-1
@item mouse-1
Select date by clicking on it.
@kindex S-@key{right}
@item S-@key{right}
One day forward.
@kindex S-@key{left}
@item S-@key{left}
One day back.
@kindex S-@key{down}
@item S-@key{down}
One week forward.
@kindex S-@key{up}
@item S-@key{up}
One week back.
@kindex M-S-@key{right}
@item M-S-@key{right}
One month forward.
@kindex M-S-@key{left}
@item M-S-@key{left}
One month back.
@kindex @key{RET}
@item @key{RET}
Choose date in calendar (only if nothing typed into minibuffer).
@end table

@node Timeline and Agenda, Exporting, Timestamps, Top
@chapter Timeline and Agenda
@cindex agenda

We have already described three commands to filter important
information in an org file into a sparse tree (@pxref{Sparse trees}):

@cindex sparse trees
@itemize @bullet
@item
The TODO tree, (@kbd{C-c C-v}), see @ref{TODO items}.
@item
The occur tree @kbd{C-c /}, see @ref{TODO items}.
@item
Checking upcoming deadlines with @kbd{C-c C-w}, see @ref{Creating
timestamps}.
@end itemize
@noindent

Instead of using the sparse trees, Org-mode can also collect and
time-sort the important items into a separate buffer, which we call
the @emph{timeline} of the org file.  It can also collect information
from a @emph{list of files} and in this way provide an @emph{agenda}
which covers all of your current projects, action items and
appointments.

@menu
* Timeline::                    Time-sorted view for single file
* Agenda::                      Your weekly planner
* Agenda commands::             Remote editing of org trees
* Calendar/Diary integration::  Integrating Anniversaries and more
@end menu

@node Timeline, Agenda, Timeline and Agenda, Timeline and Agenda
@section Timeline for a single file
@cindex single file summary
@cindex agenda, for single file
@cindex timeline, single file
@cindex time-sorted view

The timeline shows all time-stamped items in a single Org-mode file,
in @emph{time-sorted view}.  The main purpose of this command is to
give an overview over events in a project.

@table @kbd
@kindex C-c C-r
@item C-c C-r
Show a time-sorted view of the org file, with all time-stamped items
of today or later.  When called with a @kbd{C-u} prefix, past dates
will be included as well.  When called with two @kbd{C-u C-u}
prefixes, all unfinished TODO entries (scheduled or not) are also
listed under the current date.
@end table
@noindent

The timeline is shown in a temporary buffer @file{*Org Agenda*}.  The
commands available in the Agenda buffer are listed in @ref{Agenda
commands}.

@node Agenda, Agenda commands, Timeline, Timeline and Agenda
@section Agenda
@cindex agenda

An agenda can be compiled from one or more org files.  The main
purpose of this command is to act like a paper agenda, showing you all
the tasks for the current day or week.

The Org-mode files to be processed in order to generate the agenda are
listed in the variable @code{org-agenda-files}.  You can customize
this variable, but the easiest way to maintain it is through the
following commands

@cindex files, adding to agenda list
@table @kbd
@kindex C-c [
@item C-c [
Add current file to the list of agenda files
@kindex C-c ]
@item C-c ]
Remove current file from the list of agenda files.
@end table
@noindent
The Org menu contains the list of all files and can be used to quickly
visit any of them.

The global command @command{org-agenda} compiles the agenda from all
listed files.

@table @kbd
@cindex org-agenda, command
@kindex C-c a
@item C-c a
Compile an agenda for the current week from a list of org files.  The
agenda shows the entries for each day.  With a @kbd{C-u} prefix (or
when the variable @code{org-agenda-include-all-todo} is @code{t}), all
unfinished TODO items (also those without a date) are also listed at
the beginning of the buffer, before the first date.@*
The key binding @kbd{C-c a} is only a suggestion - see
@ref{Installation and Activation}.
@end table

The commands available in the Agenda buffer are listed in
@ref{Agenda commands}.

@subsection Categories

@cindex category
In the agenda buffer, each entry is preceded by a @emph{category},
which is derived from the file name.  The category can also be set
with a special line anywhere in the buffer, looking like this:
@example
#+CATEGORY: Thesis
@end example
@noindent
After changing this line, press @kbd{C-c C-c} with the cursor still in
the line, to make the changes known to org-mode.  Otherwise, the
change will only be active the next time you visit this file with
Emacs.

The display in the agenda buffer looks best if the category is not
longer than 10 characters.

@subsection Time-of-Day Specifications

Org-mode checks each agenda item for a timeof-day specification.  The
time can be part of the time stamp that triggered inclusion into the
agenda, for example as in @w{@samp{<2005-05-10 Tue 19:00>}}.  Time
ranges can be specified with two time stamps, like
@c
@w{@samp{<2005-05-10 Tue 20:30>--<2005-05-10 Tue 22:15>}}.

In the headline of the entry itself, a time(range) may also appear as
plain text (like @samp{12:45} or a @samp{8:30-1pm}.  If the agenda
integrates the Emacs diary (@pxref{Calendar/Diary integration}), time
specifications in diary entries are recognized as well.

For agenda display, Org-mode extracts the time and displays it in a
standard 24 hour format as part of the prefix.  The example times in
the previous paragraphs would end up in the agenda like this:

@example
    8:30-13:00 Arthur Dent lies in front of the bulldozer
   12:45...... Ford Prefect arrives and takes Arthur to the pub
   19:00...... The Vogon reads his poem
   20:30-22:15 Marwin escorts the Hitchhikers to the bridge
@end example

If the agenda is in single-day mode, or for the display of today, the
timed entries are embedded in a time grid, like

@example
    8:00...... ------------------
    8:30-13:00 Arthur Dent lies in front of the bulldozer
   10:00...... ------------------
   12:00...... ------------------
   12:45...... Ford Prefect arrives and takes Arthur to the pub
   14:00...... ------------------
   16:00...... ------------------
   18:00...... ------------------
   19:00...... The Vogon reads his poem
   20:00...... ------------------
   20:30-22:15 Marwin escorts the Hitchhikers to the bridge
@end example

The time grid can be turned on and off with the variable
@code{org-agenda-use-time-grid}, and can be configured with
@code{org-agenda-time-grid}.


@subsection Sorting of agenda items
@cindex sorting, of agenda items
@cindex priorities, of agenda items
The entries for each day are sorted.  The default order is to first
collect all items containing an explicit time-of-day specification.
These entries will be shown at the beginning of the list, as a
@emph{schedule} for the day.  After that, items remain grouped in
categories, in the sequence given by @code{org-agenda-files}.  Within
each category, items are sorted by priority (@pxref{Priorities}).

The priority is a numerical quantity composed of the base priority
(2000 for priority @samp{A}, 1000 for @samp{B}, and 0 for @samp{C}),
plus additional increments for overdue scheduled or deadline items.

Sorting can be customized using the variable
@code{org-agenda-sorting-strategy}.

@node Agenda commands, Calendar/Diary integration, Agenda, Timeline and Agenda
@section Commands in the agenda buffer

Entries in the agenda buffer are linked back to the org file or diary
file where they originate.  You are not allowed to edit the agenda
buffer itself, but commands are provided to show and jump to the
original entry location, and to edit the org-files ``remotely'' from
the agenda buffer.  In this way, all information is stored only once,
and you don't risk that your agenda and note files diverge.

Some commands can be executed with mouse clicks on agenda lines.  For
the other commands, the cursor needs to be in the desired line.  Most
commands are available for both timelines and the agenda.  The
exceptions are marked.

@table @kbd
@tsubheading{Motion}
@kindex n
@item n
Next line (same as @key{up}).
@kindex p
@item p
Previous line (same as @key{down}).
@tsubheading{View/GoTo org file}
@kindex mouse-3
@kindex @key{SPC}
@item mouse-3
@itemx @key{SPC}
Display the original location of the item in another window.

@kindex l
@item l
Display original location and recenter that window.

@kindex mouse-2
@kindex @key{TAB}
@item mouse-2
@itemx @key{TAB}
Go to the original location of the item in another window.

@kindex @key{RET}
@itemx @key{RET}
Go to the original location of the item and delete other windows.

@kindex f
@item f
Toggle follow mode.  In follow mode, as you move the cursor through
the agenda buffer, the other window always shows the corresponding
location in the org file.

@tsubheading{Change display}
@kindex o
@item o
Delete other windows.

@kindex w
@item w
Switch to weekly view (7 days displayed together)

@kindex d
@item d
Switch to daily view (just one day displayed)

@kindex D
@item D
Toggle the inclusion of diary entries.  See @ref{Calendar/Diary integration}.

@kindex g
@item g
Toggle the time grid on and off.  See also the variables
@code{org-agenda-use-time-grid} and @code{org-agenda-time-grid}.

@kindex r
@item r
Recreate the agenda buffer, for example to reflect the changes
after modification of the time stamps of items with S-@key{left} and
S-@key{right}.

@kindex @key{right}
@item @key{right}
Display the following @code{org-agenda-ndays} days.  For example, if
the display covers a week, switch to the following week.  With prefix
arg, go forward that many times @code{org-agenda-ndays} days.  Not
available in timelines.

@kindex @key{left}
@item @key{left}
Display the previous dates.  Not available in timelines.

@kindex .
@item .
Goto today.

@tsubheading{Remote editing}

@item 0-9
Digit argument.

@kindex t
@item t
Change the TODO state of the item, both in the agenda and in the
original org file.

@kindex ,
@item ,
Set the priority for the current item.  Org-mode prompts for the
priority character. If you reply with @key{SPC}, the priority cookie
is removed from the entry.

@kindex P
@item p
Display weighted priority of current item.

@kindex +
@kindex S-@key{up}
@item +
@itemx S-@key{up}
Increase the priority of the current item.  The priority is changed in
the original buffer, but the agenda is not resorted.  Use the @kbd{r}
key for this.

@kindex -
@kindex S-@key{down}
@item -
@itemx S-@key{down}
Decrease the priority of the current item.

@kindex S-@key{right}
@item S-@key{right}
Change the time stamp associated with the current line by one day into
the future.  With prefix argument, change it by that many days.  For
example, @kbd{3 6 5 S-@key{right}} will change it by a year.  The
stamp is changed in the original org file, but the change is not
directly reflected in the agenda buffer.  Use the
@kbd{r} key to update the buffer.

@kindex S-@key{left}
@item S-@key{left}
Change the time stamp associated with the current line by one day
into the past.

@kindex >
@item >
Change the time stamp associated with the current line to today.
The key @kbd{>} has been chosen, because it is the same as @kbd{S-.}
on my keyboard.

@cindex diary entries, creating from agenda
@kindex i
@item i
Insert a new entry into the diary.  Prompts for the type of entry
(day, weekly, monthly, yearly, anniversary, cyclic) and creates a new
entry in the diary, just like @kbd{i d} etc. would do in the calendar.
The date is taken from the cursor position.

@tsubheading{Calendar commands}
@kindex c
@item c
Open the Emacs calendar and move to the date at the agenda cursor.

@item c
When in the calendar, compute and show the Org-mode agenda for the
date at the cursor.

@kindex M
@item M
Show the phases of the moon for three month around current date.

@kindex S
@item S
Show sunrise and sunset times.  The geographical location must be set
with calendar variables, see documentation of the Emacs calendar.

@kindex C
@item C
Convert the date at cursor into many other cultural and historic
calendars.

@kindex H
@item H
Show holidays for three month around the cursor date.

@tsubheading{Quit and Exit}
@kindex q
@item q
Quit Agenda, remove the agenda buffer.

@kindex x
@cindex agenda files, removing buffers
@item x
Exit agenda, remove the agenda buffer and all buffers loaded by Emacs
for the compilation of the agenda.  Buffers created by the user to
visit org files will not be removed.

@end table

@node Calendar/Diary integration,  , Agenda commands, Timeline and Agenda
@section Calendar/Diary integration
@cindex calendar integration
@cindex diary integration

Emacs contains the calendar and diary by Edward M. Reingold.  The
calendar displays a three-month calendar with holidays from different
countries and cultures.  The diary allows to keep track of
anniversaries, lunar phases, sunrise/set, recurrent appointments
(weekly, monthly) and more.  In this way, it is quite complementary to
Org-mode.  It can be very useful to combine output from Org-mode with
the diary.

The interaction between Org-mode and diary works both ways: You can
list entries from the diary in the Org-mode agenda, from which many
calendar and diary commands are directly accessible.  Or you can
display entries from the org agenda in the Emacs diary.

@menu
* Diary to agenda::             Agenda incorporates the diary
* Agenda to diary::             Diary incorporates the agenda
@end menu

@node Diary to agenda, Agenda to diary, Calendar/Diary integration, Calendar/Diary integration
@subsection Including the diary into the agenda
@cindex diary to agenda

In order to include entries from the Emacs diary into Org-mode's
agenda, you only need to customize the variable

@lisp
(setq org-agenda-include-diary t)
@end lisp
@noindent

@noindent After that, everything will happen automatically.  All diary
entries including holidays, anniversaries etc will be included in the
agenda buffer created by Org-mode.  @key{SPC}, @key{TAB}, and
@key{RET} can be used from the agenda buffer to jump to the diary
file, in order to edit existing diary entries.  The @kbd{i} command to
insert new entries for the current date works in the agenda buffer, as
well as the commands @kbd{S}, @kbd{M}, and @kbd{C} to display
Sunrise/Sunset times, show lunar phases and to convert to other
calendars, respectively.  @kbd{c} can be used to switch back and forth
between calendar and agenda.

@node Agenda to diary,  , Diary to agenda, Calendar/Diary integration
@subsection Including the agenda into the diary

If you prefer to use the Emacs diary as your main instrument and if
you wish to include the Org-mode agenda into it, the following steps
are necessary: Autoload the function @command{org-diary} as shown
above under @ref{Installation and Activation}.  You also need to use
@emph{fancy diary display} by setting in @file{.emacs}:

@lisp
(add-hook 'diary-display-hook 'fancy-diary-display)
@end lisp

Then include the following line into your @file{~/diary} file, in
order to get the entries from all files listed in the variable
@code{org-agenda-files}:

@example
&%%(org-diary)
@end example
@noindent
You may also select specific files with

@example
&%%(org-diary) ~/path/to/some/org-file.org
&%%(org-diary) ~/path/to/another/org-file.org
@end example

If you now launch the calendar and press @kbd{d} to display a diary,
the headlines of entries containing a timestamp, date range, schedule,
or deadline referring to the selected date will be listed.  Just like
in Org-mode's agenda view, the diary for @emph{today} contains
additional entries for overdue deadlines and scheduled items.  See
also the documentation of the @command{org-diary} function.

@node Exporting, Miscellaneous, Timeline and Agenda, Top
@chapter Exporting
@cindex exporting
@cindex ASCII export
@cindex HTML export

@cindex headline levels, for exporting
For printing and sharing of notes, an Org-mode document can be
exported as an ASCII file, or as HTML.  In the exported version, the
first 3 outline levels will become headlines, defining a general
document structure.  Additional levels will be exported as itemize
lists.  If you want that transition to occur at a different level,
specify it with a prefix argument.  For example,

@example
@kbd{M-1 M-x org-export-as-html}
@end example
@noindent
creates only top level headlines and does the rest as items.

@menu
* Export commands::             Commands which export and display
* HTML formatting::             Interpretation of the buffer content
* Export options::              How to influence exports
* Comment lines::               Lines which will not be exported
@end menu

@node Export commands, HTML formatting, Exporting, Exporting
@section Export commands

@cindex region, active
@cindex active region
@cindex transient-mark-mode
@table @kbd
@kindex C-c C-x a
@item C-c C-x a
Export as ASCII file.  If there is an active region, only the region
will be exported.  For an org file @file{myfile.org}, the ASCII file
will be @file{myfile.txt}.  The file will be overwritten without
warning.
@kindex C-c C-x h
@item C-c C-x h
Export as HTML file @file{myfile.html}.
@kindex C-c C-x C-h
@item C-c C-x C-h
Export as HTML file and open it with a browser.
@kindex C-c C-x t
@item C-c C-x t
Insert template with export options, see below.
@kindex C-c :
@item C-c :
Toggle fixed-width for line or region, see below.
@end table

@node HTML formatting, Export options, Export commands, Exporting
@section HTML formatting

Not all text is transferred literally to the exported HTML file.  The
exporter implements the following interpretation:

@itemize @bullet
@cindex underlined text
@cindex bold text
@cindex italic text
@item
You can make words @b{*bold*}, @i{/italic/}, and _underlined_

@cindex @TeX{} interpretation
@item
Simple @TeX{}-like math constructs are interpreted:

@cindex completion, of @TeX{} symbols
@itemize @minus
@item
@samp{10^22} and @samp{J_n} are super- and subscripts.  You can quote
@samp{^} and @samp{_} with a backslash: @samp{\_} and @samp{\^}
@item
@samp{\alpha} indicates a Greek letter, @samp{\to} an arrow.  You can
use completion for these macros, just type @samp{\} and maybe a few
letters, and press @kbd{M-@key{TAB}} to see possible completions.
@end itemize

@cindex tables, export to HTML
@item
Tables are transformed into HTML tables.  Data fields before the first
horizontal separator line will be formatted as table header fields.

@cindex fixed width
@item
Lines starting with @samp{:} are typeset in a fixed-width font, to
allow quoting of computer code etc.

@cindex HTML tags
@item
If you want to include HTML tags which should be interpreted as such,
mark them with a @samp{@@} like in @samp{@@<b>bold text@@</b>}.
Plain @samp{<} and @samp{>} are always transformed to @samp{&lt;} and
@samp{&gt;} in HTML export.
@end itemize

If these conversions conflict with your habits of typing ASCII text,
they can all be turned off with corresponding variables.

@node Export options, Comment lines, HTML formatting, Exporting
@section Export options
@cindex options, for export

@cindex completion, of option keywords
The exporter recognizes special lines in the buffer which provide
additional information.  These lines may be put anywhere in the file.
The whole set of lines can be inserted into the buffer with @kbd{C-c
C-x t}.  For individual lines, a good way to make sure the keyword is
correct it to type @samp{#+} and then use @kbd{M-@key{TAB}} completion
(@pxref{Completion}).

@example
#+TITLE:     the title to be shown (default is the buffer name)
#+AUTHOR:    the author (default taken from @code{user-full-name})
#+EMAIL:     his/her email address (default from @code{user-mail-address})
#+LANGUAGE:  language for HTML, e.g. @samp{en} (@code{org-export-default-language})
#+TEXT:      Some descriptive text to be inserted at the beginning.
#+TEXT:      Several lines may be given.
#+OPTIONS:   H:2  num:t  toc:t  \n:nil  @:t  ::t  |:t  ^:t  *:nil  TeX:t
@end example
@noindent
The OPTIONS line is a compact form to specify export settings.  Here
you can
@cindex headline levels
@cindex section-numbers
@cindex table of contents
@cindex linebreak preservation
@cindex quoted html tags
@cindex fixed-width sections
@cindex tables
@cindex @TeX{}-like syntax for sub- and superscripts
@cindex emphasized text
@cindex @TeX{} macros
@example
H:      @r{set the number of headline levels for export}
num:    @r{turn on/off section-numbers}
toc:    @r{turn on/off table of contents}
\n:     @r{turn on/off linebreak-preservation}
@@:      @r{turn on/off quoted html tags}
::      @r{turn on/off fixed-width sections}
|:      @r{turn on/off tables}
^:      @r{turn on/off @TeX{}-like syntax for sub- and superscripts.}
*:      @r{turn on/off emphasized text (bold, italic, underlined)}
TeX:    @r{turn on/off @TeX{} macros}
@end example

@node Comment lines,  , Export options, Exporting
@section Comment lines
@cindex comment lines
@cindex exporting, not

Lines starting with @samp{#} in column zero are treated as comments
and will never be exported.  Also entire subtrees starting with the
word @samp{COMMENT} will never be exported.  Finally, any text before
the first headline will not be exported either.

@table @kbd
@kindex C-c ;
@item C-c ;
Toggle the COMMENT keyword at the beginning of an entry.
@end table

@node Miscellaneous, Index, Exporting, Top
@chapter Miscellaneous

@menu
* Completion::                  M-TAB knows what you need
* Customization::               Adapting Org-mode to your taste
* FAQ::                         Frequently asked questions
* Interaction::                 Other Emacs packages
* Bugs::                        Things which do not work perfectly
* Acknowledgments::             These people provided feedback and more
@end menu

@node Completion, Customization, Miscellaneous, Miscellaneous
@section Completion
@cindex completion, of @TeX{} symbols
@cindex completion, of TODO keywords
@cindex completion, of dictionary words
@cindex completion, of option keywords
@cindex completion, of keyword formulas

Org-mode supports in-buffer completion.  This type of completion does
not make use of the minibuffer.  You simply type a few letters into
the buffer and use the key to complete text right there.

@table @kbd
@kindex M-@key{TAB}
@item M-@key{TAB}
Complete word at point
@itemize @bullet
@item
At the beginning of a headline, complete TODO keywords.
@item
After @samp{\}, complete @TeX{} symbols supported by the exporter.
@item
After @samp{#+}, complete the special keywords like @samp{TYP_TODO} or
@samp{OPTIONS} which set file-specific options for Org-mode.  When the
option keyword is already complete, pressing @kbd{M-@key{TAB}} again
will insert example settings for this keyword.
@item
After @samp{=}, complete keyword formulas for tables.
@item
Elsewhere, complete dictionary words using ispell.
@end itemize
@end table

@node Customization, FAQ, Completion, Miscellaneous
@section Customization
@cindex customization
@cindex options, for customization
@cindex variables, for customization

There is a large number of variables which can be used to customize
Org-mode.  For the sake of compactness of the manual, we are not
describing the variables here.  For an overview of customization
variables, use @kbd{M-x org-customize}.  Or select @code{Browse Org
Group} from the @code{Org->Customization} menu.

@node FAQ, Interaction, Customization, Miscellaneous
@section Frequently asked questions

@enumerate
@item @b{Org-mode seems to be auseful default mode for the various
@file{README} files I have scattered through my directories.  How do I
turn it on for all @file{README} files?}
@example
(add-to-list 'auto-mode-alist '("README$" . org-mode))
@end example

@item @b{I would like to have two windows on the same Org-mode
file, but with different outline visibility.  Is that possible?}@*
@cindex @code{make-indirect-buffer}
@cindex indirect buffers
In GNU Emacs, you may use @emph{indirect buffers} which do exactly
this.  See the documentation on the command
@code{make-indirect-buffer}.  In XEmacs, this is currently not
possible because of the different outline implementation.

@item @b{Is there an easy way to insert links to web locations?}@*
@cindex URL, paste into buffer
Sure, just type or paste them into the buffer.  A plain-text URL-like
string is directly interpreted as a link.

@item @b{When I export my TODO list, every TODO item becomes a
separate section.  How do I enforce these items to be exported as an
itemized list?}@*
If you plan to use ASCII or HTML export, make sure things you want to
be exported as item lists are level 4 at least, even if that does mean
there is a level jump.  For example

@example
* Todays top priorities
**** TODO write a letter to xyz
**** TODO Finish the paper
**** Pick up kids at the school
@end example

Alternatively, if you need a specific value for the heading/item
transition in a particular file, use the @samp{+OPTIONS} line to
configure the @samp{H} switch.

@example
+OPTIONS:   H:2; ...
@end example

@item @b{I would like to export only a subtree of my file to HTML.  How?}@*
@cindex exporting a subtree
If you want to export a subtree, mark the subtree as region and then
export.  Marking can be done with @kbd{C-c @@ C-x C-x}, for example.

@item @b{Org-mode takes over the S-cursor keys.  I also want to use
CUA-mode, is there a way to fix this conflict?}@*
Yes, see @ref{Interaction}

@item @b{Is there an easy way to insert an empty table template with a
default number of rows and columns?}@*
@cindex table, empty template
To insert an empty table template, just type @samp{|-} and use
@key{TAB}.  The default size can be changed with the variable
@code{org-table-default-size}.  However, just starting to type the
first line is usually much easier.

@item @b{One of my table columns has started to fill up with
@samp{#ERROR}.  What is going on?}@*
Org-mode tried to compute the column from other fields using a
formula stored in the @samp{#+TBLFMT:} line just below the table, and
the evaluation of the formula fails.  Fix the fields used in the
formula, or fix the formula, or remove it!

@item @b{When I am in the last column of a table and just above a
horizontal line in the table, pressing TAB creates a new table line
@i{before} the horizontal line.  How can I quickly move to the line
@i{below} the horizontal line instead?}@*
Press @key{down} (to get on the separator line) and then @key{TAB}.

@item @b{How can I change the indentation of an entire table without
fixing every line by hand?}@*
@cindex indentation, of tables
The indentation of a table is set by the first line.  So just fix the
indentation of the first line and realign with @key{TAB}.

@end enumerate


@node Interaction, Bugs, FAQ, Miscellaneous
@section Interaction with other packages
@cindex packages, interaction with other
Org-mode can cooperate with the following packages:

@table @asis
@cindex @file{table.el}
@item @file{table.el} by Takaaki Ota
Org mode cooperates with table.el, see @ref{table.el}.
@cindex @file{calc.el}
@item @file{calc.el} by Dave Gillespie
Org-mode uses the calc package for implementing spreadsheet
functionality in its tables (@pxref{Table calculations}).  Org-modes
checks for the availability of calc by looking for the function
@code{calc-eval} which should be autoloaded in your setup if calc has
been installed properly.  As of Emacs 22, calc is part of the Emacs
distribution.  Another possibility for interaction between the two
packages is using calc for embedded calculations. @xref{Embedded Mode,
, Embedded Mode, calc, The calc maanual}.
@cindex @file{constants.el}
@item @file{constants.el} by Carsten Dominik
In a table formula (@pxref{Table calculations}), it is possible to use
names for natural constants or units.  Instead of defining you own
constants in the variable @code{org-table-formula-constants}, install
the @file{constants} package which defines a large number of constants
and units, and lets you use unit prefixes like @samp{M} for
@samp{Mega} etc.  You will need version 2.0 of this package, available
at @url{http://www.astro.uva.nl/~dominik/Tools}. Org-mode checks for
the function @code{constants-get}, which has to be autoloaded in your
setup.  See the installation instructions in the file
@file{constants.el}.
@cindex @file{remember.el}
@cindex @file{CUA.el}
@item @file{CUA.el} by Kim. F. Storm
Keybindings in Org-mode conflict with the @kbd{S-<cursor>} keys
used by CUA-mode (as well as pc-select-mode and s-region-mode) to
select and extend the region.  If you want to use one of these
packages along with Org-mode, configure the variable
@code{org-CUA-compatible}.  When set, Org-mode will move the following
keybindings in org-mode files, and in the agenda buffer (but not
during date selection).
@example
S-UP    -> M-p             S-DOWN  -> M-n
S-LEFT  -> M--             S-RIGHT -> M-+
S-RET   -> C-S-RET
@end example
Yes, these are unfortunately more difficult to remember.  If you want
to have other replacement keys, look at the variable
@code{org-disputed-keys}.
@item @file{remember.el} by John Wiegley
Org mode cooperates with remember, see @ref{Remember}.
@cindex @file{planner.el}
@item @file{planner.el} by John Wiegley
Planner is another tool to plan work and keep track of tasks.  Planner
uses a multi-file approach with project pages and day pages.  Is based
on Emacs-Wiki.  If Planner is your primary tool, it can be useful to
display the agenda entries resulting from org files in day-pages of
the planner.  This can be done through the diary of the calendar:
Integrate org files into the diary as described above, and then turn
on the diary support of planner.
@end table

@node Bugs, Acknowledgments, Interaction, Miscellaneous
@section Bugs
@cindex bugs

Here is a list of things which should work differently, but which I
have found too hard to fix.

@itemize @bullet
@item
If you call @code{fill-paragraph} (bound to @kbd{M-q}) in a table, the
filling is correctly disabled.  However, if some text directly
(without an empty line in between) preceeds or follows a table, calling
@code{fill-paragraph} in that text will also fill the table like
normal text.  Also, @code{fill-region} does bypass the
@code{fill-paragraph} code and will fill tables like normal text.
@item
When the application called by @kbd{C-c C-o} to open a file link fails
(for example because the application does not exits or refuses to open
the file), it does so silently.  No error message is displayed.
@item
Recalculating a table line applies the formulas from left to right.
If a formula calculated fields further doen the row, multiple
recalculation may be needed to get all fields consistent.
@item
Under XEmacs, if Org-mode entries are included into the diary, it is
not possible to jump back from the diary to the org file.  Apparently,
the text properties are lost when the fancy-diary-display is used.
However, from Org-mode's timeline and agenda buffers (created with
@kbd{C-c C-r} and @kbd{C-c a}), things do work correctly.
@item
Linux should also have a default viewer application, using mailcap.
Maybe we can use GNUS or VM mime code?  Or dired's guessing commands?
Any hints (or even patches) are appreciated.
@item
When you write @samp{x = a /b/ c}, b will be exported in italics.
@item
The exporters work well, but could be made more efficient.
@end itemize

@page

@node Acknowledgments,  , Bugs, Miscellaneous
@section Acknowledgments
@cindex acknowledgments

Org-mode was written by Carsten Dominik, who still maintains it at the
Org-mode homepage @uref{http://www.astro.uva.nl/~dominik/Tools/org/}.
The following people have helped the development along with ideas,
suggestions and patches.

@itemize @bullet
@item
Matthias Rempe (Oelde) provided ideas, a patch introducing Windows
NT/2000 support, and quality control.
@item
Kevin Rogers contributed code to access VM files on remote hosts.
@item
Juergen Vollmer contributed code generating the table of contents
in HTML output, and other export improvements.
@item
Christian Egli converted the documentation into TeXInfo format.  He
also showed me his plans for a multifile summary for Org-mode. Some of
his ideas have found their way into the agenda.
@item
Philip Rooke created the Org-mode reference card.  He also helped with
beta testing and contributed a number of very useful ideas.
@item
Christian Schlauer proposed angular brackets around links, among other
things.
other useful stuff.
@item
David Wainberg suggested to implement an archiving mechanism.
@item
Linking to VM/BBDB/GNUS was inspired by Tom Shannon's
@file{organizer-mode.el}.
@item
Scheduling TODO items was inspired by John Wiegley's @file{planner.el}.
@item
Sacha Chua, the current maintainer of Planner, offered linking code
from Planner. I made use of the offer for links to RMAIL and Wanderlust.
@item
Oliver Oppitz sent several useful suggestions.
@item
Carsten Wimmer suggested some changes and helped fix a bug in linking
to GNUS.
@item
Pavel Chalmoviansky reported bugs and suggested improvements related
to the agenda treatment of items with specified time.
@item
Stefan Monnier provided a patch with lots of little fixes to keep the
Emacs-Lisp compiler happy.
@item
Kai Grossjohann pointed out that a number of key bindings in Org-mode
conflict with other packages.
@end itemize

@node Index, Key Index, Miscellaneous, Top
@chapter Index

@printindex cp

@node Key Index,  , Index, Top
@chapter Key Index

@printindex ky

@bye


@ignore
   arch-tag: 7893d1fe-cc57-4d13-b5e5-f494a1bcc7ac
@end ignore
