\input texinfo  @c -*-texinfo-*-

@c "@(#)$Name:  $:$Id: pcl-cvs.texi,v 1.1 2000/06/01 03:34:57 monnier Exp $"

@c Documentation for the GNU Emacs CVS mode.
@c Copyright (C) 1991-2000  Free Software Foundation, Inc.

@c This file is part of GNU Emacs

@c GNU Emacs is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
@c it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
@c the Free Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License,
@c or (at your option) any later version.

@c GNU Emacs is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
@c but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
@c MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
@c GNU General Public License for more details.

@c You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
@c along with pcl-cvs; see the file COPYING.  If not, write to
@c the Free Software Foundation, 675 Mass Ave, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

@c %**start of header
@setfilename ../info/pcl-cvs
@settitle PCL-CVS - Emacs Front-End to CVS
@c %**end of header

@c @dircategory Editors
@direntry
* PCL-CVS: (pcl-cvs).	Emacs front-end to CVS
@end direntry
@setchapternewpage on
     
@ifinfo
Copyright @copyright{} 1991-2000  Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through Tex and print the
results, provided the printed document carries copying permission
notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph
(this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).
@end ignore

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also that the
section entitled ``GNU General Public License'' is included exactly as
in the original, and provided that the entire resulting derived work is
distributed under the terms of a permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that the section entitled ``GNU General Public License'' and
this permission notice may be included in translations approved by the
Free Software Foundation instead of in the original English.
@end ifinfo

@synindex vr fn
@c The titlepage section does not appear in the Info file.
@titlepage
@sp 4
@c The title is printed in a large font.
@center @titlefont{User's Guide}
@sp
@center @titlefont{to}
@sp
@center @titlefont{PCL-CVS - The Emacs Front-End to CVS}
@ignore
@sp 2
@center release 2.9
@c -release-
@end ignore
@sp 3
@center Per Cederqvist
@center Stefan Monnier
@c -date-

@c  The following two commands start the copyright page
@c  for the printed manual.  This will not appear in the Info file.
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 1991-2000  Free Software Foundation, Inc.

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also that the
section entitled ``GNU General Public License'' is included exactly as
in the original, and provided that the entire resulting derived work is
distributed under the terms of a permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that the section entitled ``GNU General Public License'' and
this permission notice may be included in translations approved by the
Free Software Foundation instead of in the original English.
@end titlepage

@c ================================================================
@c                   The real text starts here
@c ================================================================

@node Top, About PCL-CVS, (dir), (dir)
@ifinfo
@top PCL-CVS

This info manual describes PCL-CVS, the GNU Emacs front-end to CVS.  It
is nowhere near complete, so you are advised to use @kbd{M-x
customize-group RET pcl-cvs RET} and to look at the documentation strings
of the various commands and major modes for further information.
@c This manual is updated to release 2.5 of PCL-CVS.
@end ifinfo

@menu
* About PCL-CVS::               Installation, credits, history, ...

* Getting started::             An introduction with a walk-through example.
* Buffer contents::             An explanation of the buffer contents.
* Selected files::              To which files are commands applied.
* Commands::                    All commands, grouped by type.

* Log Edit Mode::               Major mode to edit log messages.
* Log View Mode::               Major mode to browse log changes.
* CVS Status Mode::             Major mode to view CVS' status output.
* Customization::               How you can tailor PCL-CVS to suit your needs.
* Bugs::                        Bugs (known and unknown).

* Function and Variable Index::  List of functions and variables.
* Concept Index::               List of concepts.
* Key Index::                   List of keystrokes.

@detailmenu
 --- The Detailed Node Listing ---

About PCL-CVS

* Contributors::                Contributors to PCL-CVS.
* Installation::                

Commands

* Entering PCL-CVS::            Commands to invoke PCL-CVS
* Setting flags::               Setting flags for CVS commands
* Updating the buffer::         
* Movement commands::           How to move up and down in the buffer
* Marking files::               How to mark files that other commands
                                will later operate on.
* Committing changes::          Checking in your modifications to the
                                CVS repository. 
* Editing files::               Loading files into Emacs.
* Getting info about files::    Display the log and status of files.
* Adding and removing files::   Adding and removing files
* Undoing changes::             Undoing changes
* Removing handled entries::    Uninteresting lines can easily be removed.
* Ignoring files::              Telling CVS to ignore generated files.
* Viewing differences::         Commands to @samp{diff} different versions.
* Invoking Ediff::              Running @samp{ediff} from @samp{*cvs*} buffer.
* Updating files::              Updating files that Need-update.
* Tagging files::               Tagging files.
* Miscellaneous commands::      Miscellaneous commands.

Customization

* Customizing Faces::           

@end detailmenu
@end menu

@node     About PCL-CVS, Getting started, Top, Top
@chapter About PCL-CVS
@cindex About PCL-CVS

PCL-CVS is a front-end to CVS versions 1.9 and later.
It concisely shows the present status of a checked out module in an
Emacs buffer and provides single-key access to the most frequently used CVS
commands.
For Emacs users accustomed to VC, PCL-CVS can be thought of as a replacement
for VC-dired (@pxref{(emacs)VC Dired Mode}) specifically designed for CVS.

PCL-CVS was originally written many years ago by Per Cederqvist who
proudly maintained it until January 1996, at which point he released the
beta version 2.0b2 and passed on the maintainership to Greg A Woods.
Development stayed mostly dormant for a few years during which the
version 2.0 never seemed to be able to leave the ``beta'' stage while a
separate XEmacs version was slowly splitting away.  In late 1998,
Stefan Monnier picked up development again, adding some major new
functionality and taking over maintenance.

As of Emacs-21, PCL-CVS is part of the standard Emacs distribution.

@menu
* Contributors::                Contributors to PCL-CVS.
* Installation::                
@end menu

@node     Contributors, Installation, About PCL-CVS, About PCL-CVS
@section Contributors to PCL-CVS
@cindex Contributors
@cindex Authors

Contributions to the package are welcome.  I have limited time to work
on this project, but I will gladly add any code that you contribute to
me to this package (@pxref{Bugs}).

The following persons have made contributions to PCL-CVS.

@itemize @bullet
@item
Brian Berliner wrote CVS, together with some other contributors.
Without his work on CVS this package would be useless@dots{}

@item
Per Cederqvist wrote most of the otherwise unattributed functions in
PCL-CVS as well as all documentation.

@item
Inge Wallin (@samp{inge@@lysator.liu.se}) wrote the skeleton to
@file{pcl-cvs.texi}, and gave useful comments on it.  He also wrote
the files @file{elib-node.el} and @file{compile-all.el}.  The file
@file{cookie.el} was inspired by Inge.@refill

@item
Linus Tolke (@samp{linus@@lysator.liu.se}) contributed useful comments
on both the functionality and the documentation.@refill

@item
Jamie Zawinski (@samp{jwz@@jwz.com}) contributed
@file{pcl-cvs-lucid.el}, which was later renamed to
@file{pcl-cvs-xemacs.el}.@refill

@item
Leif Lonnblad contributed RCVS support.  (Since superceded by the new
remote CVS support.)

@item
Jim Blandy (@samp{jimb@@cyclic.com}) contributed hooks to automatically
guess CVS log entries from ChangeLog contents; and initial support of
the new Cygnus / Cyclic remote CVS; as well as various sundry bug fixes
and cleanups.

@item
Jim Kingdon (@samp{kingdon@@cyclic.com}) contributed lots of fixes to
the build and install procedure.

@item
Greg A. Woods (@samp{woods@@weird.com}) contributed code to implement
the use of per-file diff buffers; and vendor join diffs with emerge and
ediff; as well as various and sundry bug fixes and cleanups.

@item
Greg Klanderman (@samp{greg.klanderman@@alum.mit.edu}) implemented
toggling of marked files; setting of CVS command flags via prefix
arguments; updated the XEmacs support; updated the manual; and fixed
numerous bugs.

@item
Stefan Monnier (@samp{monnier@@cs.yale.edu}) added a slew of other
features and introduced even more new bugs.  If there's any bug left,
you can be sure it's his.

@item
Masatake YAMATO (@samp{masata-y@@is.aist-nara.ac.jp}) graciously
contributed the cvstree code to display a tree of tags which was later
superseded by the new cvs-status-mode.

@end itemize

Apart from these, a lot of people have sent us suggestions, ideas,
requests, bug reports and encouragement.  Thanks a lot!  Without you
there would be no new releases of PCL-CVS.


@node   Installation,  , Contributors, About PCL-CVS
@section Installation
@cindex Installation

As mentioned above, PCL-CVS comes preinstalled since Emacs-21.
If you're using Emacs 20, you can download an older version of PCL-CVS
from @url{ftp://flint.cs.yale.edu/pub/monnier/pcl-cvs}.  That version
also works on XEmacs.

If you are running XEmacs 21.0 or later, PCL-CVS is available in
pre-compiled package form.  Please refer to the XEmacs manual for
instructions regarding package selection and installation.  Currently,
that PCL-CVS package also requires you to have installed the xemacs-base,
elib, and dired packages. 

If you have @TeX{} installed at your site, you can make a typeset manual
from @file{pcl-cvs.texi}.

@enumerate
@item
Run @TeX{} by typing @samp{texi2dvi pcl-cvs.texi}.
@item
Convert the resulting device independent file @file{pcl-cvs.dvi} to a
form which your printer can output and print it.  If you have a
postscript printer there is a program, @code{dvi2ps}, which does.  There
is also a program which comes together with @TeX{}, @code{dvips}, which
you can use.
@end enumerate


@node Getting started, Buffer contents, About PCL-CVS, Top
@chapter Getting started
@cindex Introduction
@cindex Example run

This document assumes that you know what CVS is, and that you at least
know the fundamental concepts of CVS.  If that is not the case you
should read the man page for CVS.

PCL-CVS is only useful once you have checked out a module.  So before
you invoke it you must have a copy of a module somewhere in the file
system.

You can invoke PCL-CVS by typing @kbd{M-x cvs-examine RET}.
You can also invoke it via the menubar, under Tools.
Or if you prefer, you can also invoke PCL-CVS by simply visiting the
CVS administrative subdirectory of your module, with a prefix argument.
F.ex. @kbd{C-u C-x 5 f ~/my/project/CVS RET}.

The function @code{cvs-examine} will ask for a directory.  The command
@samp{cvs -n update} will be run in that directory.  (It should contain
files that have been checked out from a CVS archive.)  The output from
@code{cvs} will be parsed and presented in a table in a buffer called
@samp{*cvs*}.  It might look something like this:

@example
Repository : /usr/CVSroot
Module     : test
Working dir: /users/ceder/FOO/test


In directory .:
           Need-Update            bar
           Need-Update            file.txt
           Modified               namechange
           Need-Update            newer
In directory sub:
           Modified               ChangeLog

--------------------- End ---------------------
-- last cmd: cvs -f -z6 -n update -d -P --
@end example

In this example, your repository is in @file{/usr/CVSroot} and CVS has
been run in the directory @file{/users/ceder/FOO/test}.  The three files
(@file{bar}, @file{file.txt} and 
@file{newer}) that are marked with @samp{Need-Update} have been changed
by someone else in the CVS repository.  Two files (@file{namechange}
and @file{sub/ChangeLog}) have been modified locally, and need to be
checked in.

You can move the cursor up and down in the buffer with @kbd{C-n} and
@kbd{C-p} or @kbd{n} and @kbd{p}.  If you press @kbd{c} on one of the
@samp{Modified} files that file will be checked in to the CVS
repository. @xref{Committing changes}.  You can also press @kbd{O} to
update any of the files that are marked @samp{Need-Update}.  You can
also run @kbd{M-x cvs-update RET} (bound to @kbd{M-u} in the
@samp{*cvs*} buffer) to update all the files.@refill

You can then press @kbd{=} to easily get a @samp{diff} between your
modified file and the base version that you started from or you can
press @kbd{l} to get the output from @samp{cvs log}.  Many more such
commands are available simply by pressing a key (@pxref{Getting info
about files}).

@node Buffer contents, Selected files, Getting started, Top
@chapter Buffer contents
@cindex Buffer contents

The display contains several columns, some of which are optional.
They contain, from left to right:

@itemize @bullet

@item
Optionally, the head revision of the file.  This is the latest version
found in the repository.  It might also contain (instead of the head
revision) a sub status which typically gives further information about
how we got to the current state, for example @samp{patched},
@samp{merged}, ...

@item
An asterisk when the file is @dfn{marked} (@pxref{Selected
files}).@refill

@item
The actual status of the file wrt to the repository.  @xref{Buffer
contents}, for more information.@refill

@item
Optionally, the base revision of the file.  This is the version
which the copy in your working directory is based upon.

@item
The file name.

@end itemize

The @samp{file status} field can have the following values:

@table @samp

@item Modified
The file is modified in your working directory, and there was no
modification to the same file in the repository.  This status can have
the following substatus:

@table @samp

@item merged
The file was modified in your working directory, and there were
modifications in the repository as well, but they were merged
successfully, without conflict, in your working directory.@refill

@end table

@item Conflict
A conflict was detected while trying to merge your changes to @var{file}
with changes from the repository.  @var{file} (the copy in your
working directory) is now the output of the @samp{rcsmerge} command on
the two versions; an unmodified copy of your file is also in your
working directory, with the name @file{.#@var{file}.@var{version}},
where @var{version} is the RCS revision that your modified file started
from.  @xref{Viewing differences}, for more details.@refill

A conflict can also come from a disagreement on the existence of the file
rather than on its content.  This case is indicated by the following
possible substatus:

@table @samp

@item removed
The file is locally removed but a new revision has been committed to
the repository by someone else.

@item added
The file is locally added and has also been added to the repository
by someone else.

@item modified
The file is locally modified but someone else has removed it from the
repository.

@end table

@item Added
The file has been added by you, but it still needs to be checked in to
the repository.@refill

@item Removed
The file has been removed by you, but it still needs to be checked in to
the repository.  You can resurrect it by typing @kbd{a} (@pxref{Adding
and removing files}).@refill

@item Unknown
A file that was detected in your directory, but that neither appears in
the repository, nor is present on the list of files that CVS should
ignore.@refill

@item Up-to-date
The file is up to date with respect to the version in the repository.
This status can have a substatus of:

@table @samp

@item added
You have just added the file to the repository.@refill

@item updated
The file was brought up to date with respect to the repository.  This is
done for any file that exists in the repository but not in your source,
and for files that you haven't changed but are not the most recent
versions available in the repository.@refill

@item patched
The file was brought up to date with respect to the remote repository by
way of fetching and applying a patch to the file in your source.  This
is equivalent to @samp{updated} except that CVS decided to use a hopefully
more efficient method.@refill

@item committed
You just committed the file.@refill

@end table

@item Need-Update
Either a newer version than the one in your source is available in the
repository and you have not modified your checked out version, or the
file exists in the repository but not in your source.  Use
@samp{cvs-mode-update} bound to @kbd{O} to update the file.@refill

@item Need-Merge
You have modified the checked out version of the file, and a newer
version is available in the repository.  A merge will take place when
you run a @samp{cvs-update}.

@item Missing
The file has been unexpectedly removed from your working directory
although it has not been @samp{cvs remove}d.

@end table

@node Selected files, Commands, Buffer contents, Top
@chapter Selected files
@cindex Selected files
@cindex Marked files
@cindex File selection
@cindex Active files
@cindex Applicable

Many of the commands work on the current set of @dfn{selected} files
which can be either the set of marked files (if any file is marked and
marks are no ignored) or whichever file or directory the cursor is on.

If a directory is selected but the command cannot be applied to a
directory, then it will be applied to the set of files under this
directory which are in the @samp{*cvs*} buffer.

Furthermore, each command only operates on a subset of the selected
files, depending on whether or not the command is @dfn{applicable} to
each file (based on the file's status).  For example,
@code{cvs-mode-commit} is not applicable to a file whose status is
@samp{Need-Update}.  If it should happen that PCL-CVS guesses the
applicability wrong, you can override it with the special prefix
@code{cvs-mode-force-command} normally bound to @kbd{M-f} (and file a
bug report).  The applicability rule can be slightly changed with
@code{cvs-allow-dir-commit} and @code{cvs-force-dir-tag}.

By default, marks are always in effect (you may change this, however, by
setting the variable @code{cvs-default-ignore-marks}) except for the
commands that @samp{tag} or @samp{diff} a file (which can be changed
with the variable @code{cvs-invert-ignore-marks}).

In addition, you may use the special prefix @code{cvs-mode-toggle-marks}
normally bound to @key{T} to toggle the use of marks for the following
command.

This scheme might seem a little complicated, but once one gets used to
it, it is quite powerful.

For commands to mark and unmark files, see @xref{Marking files}.

@node Commands, Log Edit Mode, Selected files, Top
@chapter Commands

@iftex
This chapter describes all the commands that you can use in PCL-CVS.
@end iftex
@ifinfo
The nodes in this menu contains explanations about all the commands that
you can use in PCL-CVS.  They are grouped together by type.
@end ifinfo

@menu
* Entering PCL-CVS::            Commands to invoke PCL-CVS
* Setting flags::               Setting flags for CVS commands
* Updating the buffer::         
* Movement commands::           How to move up and down in the buffer
* Marking files::               How to mark files that other commands
                                will later operate on.
* Committing changes::          Checking in your modifications to the
                                CVS repository. 
* Editing files::               Loading files into Emacs.
* Getting info about files::    Display the log and status of files.
* Adding and removing files::   Adding and removing files
* Undoing changes::             Undoing changes
* Removing handled entries::    Uninteresting lines can easily be removed.
* Ignoring files::              Telling CVS to ignore generated files.
* Viewing differences::         Commands to @samp{diff} different versions.
* Invoking Ediff::              Running @samp{ediff} from @samp{*cvs*} buffer.
* Updating files::              Updating files that Need-update.
* Tagging files::               Tagging files.
* Miscellaneous commands::      Miscellaneous commands.
@end menu


@node Entering PCL-CVS, Setting flags, Commands, Commands
@section Entering PCL-CVS
@findex cvs-update
@findex cvs-examine
@findex cvs-status
@findex cvs-checkout
@findex cvs-mode-delete-lock
@cindex Getting the *cvs* buffer

Most commands in PCL-CVS require that you have a @samp{*cvs*}
buffer.  The commands that you use to get one are listed below.
For each, a @samp{cvs} process will be run, the output will be parsed by 
PCL-CVS, and the result will be printed in the @samp{*cvs*} buffer (see
@pxref{Buffer contents} for a description of the contents).@refill

@table @kbd

@item M-x cvs-update
Run a @samp{cvs update} command.  You will be asked for the directory 
in which the @samp{cvs update} will be run.@refill

@item M-x cvs-examine
Run a @samp{cvs -n update} command.  This is identical to the previous
command, except that it will only check what needs to be done but will
not change anything.  You will be asked for the directory in
which the @samp{cvs -n update} will be run.@refill

@item M-x cvs-status
Run a @samp{cvs status} command.  You will be asked for the directory 
in which the @samp{cvs status} will be run.@refill

@item M-x cvs-checkout
Run a @samp{cvs checkout} command.  You will be asked for the directory
in which the @samp{cvs update} will be run and the module to be checked
out.@refill

@ignore
@item M-x cvs-quickdir
Populate the @samp{*cvs*} buffer by just looking at the @file{CVS/Entries}
files.  This is very much like @code{cvs-examine} except that it does
not access the CVS repository which is a major advantage when the
repository is far away.  But of course, it will not be able to detect
when a file needs to be updated or merged.
@end ignore

@end table

@c The first four of
Those commands are also reachable from the menubar
under @samp{Tools->PCL-CVS}.  Finally an alternative way is to visit
with the CVS administrative subdirectory in your work area with a simple
prefix argument.  For example @kbd{C-u C-x C-f ~/my/work/CVS RET}.  This
will by default run @code{cvs-examine} but the specific behavior can be
changed with @code{cvs-dired-action} and @code{cvs-dired-use-hook}.

By default, the commands above will descend recursively into
subdirectories.  You can avoid that behavior by including @samp{-l} in
the flags for the command.  These flags can be set by giving a prefix
argument to the command (e.g., by typing
@kbd{C-u M-x cvs-update RET -l RET}).
@refill


@node Setting flags, Updating the buffer, Entering PCL-CVS, Commands
@section Setting flags for CVS commands
@cindex Special prefix

This section describes the convention used by nearly all PCL-CVS
commands for setting optional flags sent to CVS.  A single @kbd{C-u}
prefix argument is used to cause the command to prompt for flags to be
used for the current invocation of the command only.  Two @kbd{C-u} prefix
arguments are used to prompt for flags which will be set permanently, for the
current invocation and all that follow, until the flags are changed, or
unless temporary flags are set which override them.

Perhaps an example or two is in order.  Say you are about to add a
binary file to the repository, and want to specify the flags @samp{-kb}
to @samp{cvs add}.  You can type @kbd{C-u a -kb RET}, enter the
description, and the file will be added.  Subsequent adds will use the
previously prevailing flags.

As a second example, say you are about to perform a diff and want to see
the result in unified diff format, i.e. you'd like to pass the flag
@samp{-u} to both @samp{cvs diff} and @samp{diff}.  You'd also like all
subsequent diffs to use this flag.  You can type @kbd{C-u C-u = -u RET}
and the diff will be performed, and the default flags will be set to
@code{("-u")}.  You can of course override this flag for a single diff
by using a single @kbd{C-u} prefix argument.

Additionally to this, some commands can take @dfn{special prefix} arguments.
These work as follows: when called with a @kbd{C-u} prefix, the user is
prompted for a new value of the special prefix and the special prefix is
activated for the next command.  When called without the @kbd{C-u}
prefix, the special prefix is re-activated (with the same value as last
time) for the next command.  Calling the prefix command again when it's
already activated deactivates it.  Calling it with the @kbd{C-u C-u}
prefix activates it for all subsequent commands until you deactivate it
explicitly.  The special prefixes are:

@table @kbd

@item T
Toggles whether or not marks will be active in the next command.@refill

@item b
Provide the next command with a branch (can be any version
specifier) to work on.@refill

@item B
Secondary branch argument.  Only meaningful if `b' is also used.
It can be used to provide a second branch argument to
@code{cvs-mode-diff} or to @code{cvs-mode-update}.

@item M-f
Forces the next command to apply to every selected file rather than only
to the ones PCL-CVS thinks are relevant.

@end table

@node Updating the buffer, Movement commands, Setting flags, Commands
@section Updating the @samp{*cvs*} buffer
@findex cvs-update
@findex cvs-examine
@findex cvs-status
@findex cvs-mode-update
@findex cvs-mode-examine
@findex cvs-mode-status

The following commands can be used from within the @samp{*cvs*} buffer
to update the display:

@table @kbd

@item M-u
This runs the command @samp{cvs-update}.@refill

@item M-e
This runs the command @samp{cvs-examine}.@refill

@item M-s
This runs the command @samp{cvs-status}.@refill

@end table

Additionally to the above commands which operate on the whole module,
you can run the equivalent CVS command on just a subset of the
files/directories with

@table @kbd

@item O
Runs @code{cvs-mode-update} on the selected files.  When run on the
top level directory, this is equivalent to @kbd{M-u}.@refill

@item e
Runs @code{cvs-mode-examine} on the selected files.  When run on the
top level directory, this is equivalent to @kbd{M-e}.@refill

@item s
Runs @code{cvs-mode-status} on the selected files.  When run on the
top level directory, this is equivalent to @kbd{M-s} except that
CVS output will be shown in a @samp{*cvs-info*} buffer that will be
put in @samp{cvs-status-mode}.@refill

@end table


@node Movement commands, Marking files, Updating the buffer, Commands
@section Movement Commands
@cindex Movement Commands
@findex cvs-mode-next-line
@findex cvs-mode-previous-line
@kindex SPC - Move down one file
@kindex n - Move down one file
@kindex p - Move up one file

You can use most normal Emacs commands to move forward and backward in
the buffer.  Some keys are rebound to functions that take advantage of
the fact that the buffer is a PCL-CVS buffer:


@table @kbd
@item SPC
@itemx n
These keys move the cursor one file forward, towards the end of the
buffer (@code{cvs-mode-next-line}).@refill

@itemx p
This key move one file backward, towards the beginning of the buffer
(@code{cvs-mode-previous-line}).
@end table


@node Marking files, Committing changes, Movement commands, Commands
@section Marking files
@cindex Selecting files (commands to mark files)
@cindex Marking files
@kindex m - marking a file
@kindex M - marking all files
@kindex u - unmark a file
@kindex ESC DEL - unmark all files
@kindex DEL - unmark previous file
@kindex % - mark files matching regexp
@kindex T - toggle marks
@findex cvs-mode-mark
@findex cvs-mode-unmark
@findex cvs-mode-mark-all-files
@findex cvs-mode-unmark-all-files
@findex cvs-mode-unmark-up
@findex cvs-mode-mark-matching-files
@findex cvs-mode-toggle-marks

PCL-CVS works on a set of @dfn{selected files} (@pxref{Selected files}).
You can mark and unmark files with these commands:

@table @kbd
@item m
This marks the file that the cursor is positioned on.  If the cursor is
positioned on a directory all files in that directory will be marked.
(@code{cvs-mode-mark}).@refill

@item u
Unmark the file that the cursor is positioned on. If the cursor is on a
directory, all files in that directory will be unmarked.
(@code{cvs-mode-unmark}).@refill

@item M
Mark @emph{all} files in the buffer (@code{cvs-mode-mark-all-files}).

@item M-@key{DEL}
Unmark @emph{all} files (@code{cvs-mode-unmark-all-files}).

@item @key{DEL}
Unmark the file on the previous line, and move point to that line
(@code{cvs-mode-unmark-up}).

@item @key{%}
Mark all files matching a regular expression
(@code{cvs-mode-mark-matching-files}).

@item @key{T}
Toggle use of marks for the next command (@code{cvs-mode-toggle-marks}).
@end table


@node Committing changes, Editing files, Marking files, Commands
@section Committing changes
@cindex Committing changes
@cindex Ci
@findex cvs-mode-commit
@findex cvs-mode-commit-setup
@kindex c - commit files
@kindex C - commit files with ChangeLog message
@vindex cvs-auto-revert (variable)
@cindex Commit buffer
@cindex Edit buffer
@cindex Erasing commit message
@cindex Reverting buffers after commit

Committing changes basically works as follows:

@enumerate
@item
After having selected the files you want to commit, you type either
@kbd{c} or @kbd{C} which brings up a special buffer
@samp{*cvs-commit*}.@refill

@item
You type in the log message describing the changes you're about to
commit (@pxref{Log Edit Mode}).@refill

@item
When you're happy with it, you type @kbd{C-c C-c} to do the actual
commit.@refill

@end enumerate

There's no hidden state, so you can abort the process or pick it up
again at any time.

The set of files actually committed is really decided only during the
very last step, which is mixed blessing.  It allows you to go back and
change your mind about which files to commit, but it also means that you
might inadvertently change the set of selected files.  To reduce the
risk of error, @kbd{C-c C-c} will ask for confirmation if the set of
selected files has changed between the first step and the last.  You can
change this last detail with @code{log-edit-confirm}.

As for the difference between @kbd{c} (i.e. @code{cvs-mode-commit}) and
@kbd{C} (i.e. @code{cvs-mode-commit-setup}) is that the first gets you
straight to @samp{*cvs-commit*} without erasing it or changing anything
to its content, while the second will first erase @samp{*cvs-commit*}
and try to initialize it with a sane default (it will do that by either
using a template provided by the CVS administrator or by extracting a
relevant log message from a ChangeLog file).

If you are editing the files in your Emacs an automatic
@samp{revert-buffer} will be performed.  (If the file contains
@samp{$@asis{Id}$} keywords @samp{cvs commit} will write a new file with
the new values substituted.  The auto-revert makes sure that you get
them into your buffer).  The revert will not occur if you have modified
your buffer, or if @samp{cvs-auto-revert} is set to
@samp{nil}.


@node Editing files, Getting info about files, Committing changes, Commands
@section Editing files
@cindex Editing files
@cindex Finding files
@cindex Loading files
@cindex Dired
@cindex Invoking dired
@findex cvs-mode-find-file
@findex cvs-mode-find-file-other-window
@findex cvs-mode-add-change-log-entry-other-window
@kindex f - find file or directory
@kindex o - find file in other window
@kindex A - add ChangeLog entry

There are currently three commands that can be used to find a file (that
is, load it into a buffer and start editing it there).  These commands
work on the line that the cursor is situated at.  They always ignore any marked
files.

@table @kbd
@item f
Find the file that the cursor points to.  Run @samp{dired}
@ifinfo
(@pxref{Dired,,,Emacs})
@end ifinfo
if the cursor points to a directory (@code{cvs-mode-find-file}).@refill

@item o
Like @kbd{f}, but use another window
(@code{cvs-mode-find-file-other-window}).@refill

@item A
Invoke @samp{add-change-log-entry-other-window} to edit a
@samp{ChangeLog} file.  The @samp{ChangeLog} will be found in the
directory or a parent of the directory of the file the cursor points to.
(@code{cvs-mode-add-change-log-entry-other-window}).@refill
@end table


@node Getting info about files, Adding and removing files, Editing files, Commands
@section Getting info about files
@cindex Status (cvs command)
@cindex Log (RCS/cvs command)
@cindex Getting status
@kindex l - run @samp{cvs log}
@kindex s - run @samp{cvs status}
@findex cvs-mode-log
@findex cvs-mode-status

@table @kbd
@item l
Call the command @code{cvs-mode-log} which runs @samp{cvs log} on all
selected files, and show the result in a temporary @samp{*cvs-info*}
buffer (@pxref{Log View Mode}).

@item s
Call the command @code{cvs-mode-status} which runs @samp{cvs status} on
all selected files, and show the result in a temporary @samp{*cvs-info*}
buffer (@pxref{CVS Status Mode}).
@end table


@node Adding and removing files, Undoing changes, Getting info about files, Commands
@section Adding and removing files
@cindex Adding files
@cindex Removing files
@cindex Resurrecting files
@cindex Deleting files
@cindex Putting files under CVS control
@kindex a - add a file
@kindex r - remove a file
@findex cvs-mode-add
@findex cvs-mode-remove-file

The following commands are available to make it easy to add and remove
files from the CVS repository.

@table @kbd
@item a
Add all selected files.  This command can be used on @samp{Unknown}
files (@pxref{Buffer contents}).  The status of the file will change to
@samp{Added}, and you will have to use @kbd{c} (@samp{cvs-mode-commit},
@pxref{Committing changes}) to really add the file to the
repository.@refill

This command can also be used on @samp{Removed} files (before you commit
them) to resurrect them.

The command that is run is @code{cvs-mode-add}.

@item r
This command removes the selected files (after prompting for
confirmation).  The files are @samp{rm}ed from your directory and
(unless the status was @samp{Unknown}; @pxref{Buffer contents}) they will
also be @samp{cvs remove}d.  If the files were @samp{Unknown} they will
disappear from the buffer.  Otherwise their status will change to
@samp{Removed}, and you must use @kbd{c} (@samp{cvs-mode-commit},
@pxref{Committing changes}) to commit the removal.@refill

The command that is run is @code{cvs-mode-remove-file}.
@end table


@node Undoing changes, Removing handled entries, Adding and removing files, Commands
@section Undoing changes
@cindex Undo changes
@cindex Flush changes
@kindex U - undo changes
@findex cvs-mode-undo-local-changes

@table @kbd
@item U
If you have modified a file, and for some reason decide that you don't
want to keep the changes, you can undo them with this command.  It works
by removing your working copy of the file and then getting the latest
version from the repository (@code{cvs-mode-undo-local-changes}.
@end table


@node Removing handled entries, Ignoring files, Undoing changes, Commands
@section Removing handled entries
@cindex Expunging uninteresting entries
@cindex Uninteresting entries, getting rid of them
@cindex Getting rid of uninteresting lines
@cindex Removing uninteresting (processed) lines
@cindex Handled lines, removing them
@kindex x - remove processed entries
@kindex C-k - remove selected entries
@findex cvs-mode-remove-handled
@findex cvs-mode-acknowledge
@findex cvs-mode-ignore

@table @kbd
@item x
This command allows you to remove all entries that you have processed.
More specifically, the lines for @samp{Up-to-date} files (@pxref{Buffer
contents} are removed from the buffer.  If a directory becomes empty the heading
for that directory is also removed.  This makes it easier to get an
overview of what needs to be done.

The command is called @code{cvs-mode-remove-handled}.  If
@samp{cvs-auto-remove-handled} is set to non-@code{nil} this will
automatically be performed after every commit.@refill

@item C-k
This command can be used for lines that @samp{cvs-mode-remove-handled} would
not delete, but that you want to delete (@code{cvs-mode-acknowledge}).
@end table


@node Ignoring files, Viewing differences, Removing handled entries, Commands
@section Ignoring files
@kindex i - ignoring files
@findex cvs-mode-ignore

@table @kbd
@item i
Arrange so that CVS will ignore the selected files.  The file names are
added to the @file{.cvsignore} file in the corresponding directory.  If
the @file{.cvsignore} doesn't exist it will be created.

The @file{.cvsignore} file should normally be added to the repository,
but you could ignore it also if you like it better that way.

This runs @code{cvs-mode-ignore}.
@end table

@node Viewing differences, Invoking Ediff, Ignoring files, Commands
@section Viewing differences
@cindex Diff
@cindex Invoking ediff
@cindex Conflicts, how to resolve them
@cindex Viewing differences
@kindex d= - run @samp{cvs diff}
@kindex = - run @samp{cvs diff}
@kindex dh - diff against head of repository
@kindex dv - diff against vendor branch
@findex cvs-mode-diff
@findex cvs-mode-diff-backup
@findex cvs-mode-diff-head
@findex cvs-mode-diff-vendor
@vindex cvs-invert-ignore-marks

@table @kbd
@item =
@itemx d =
Display a @samp{cvs diff} between the selected files and the version
that they are based on. (@code{cvs-mode-diff}).@refill

@item d b
If CVS finds a conflict while merging two versions of a file (during a
@samp{cvs update}, @pxref{Updating the buffer}) it will save the
original file in a file called @file{.#@var{FILE}.@var{VERSION}} where
@var{FILE} is the name of the file, and @var{VERSION} is the revision
number that your file was based on.@refill

With the @kbd{b} command you can run a @samp{diff} on the files
@file{.#@var{FILE}.@var{VERSION}} and @file{@var{FILE}}.@refill

@item d h
Display a @samp{cvs diff} between the selected files and the head
revision in the repository (the most recent version on the current
branch). (@code{cvs-mode-diff-head}).@refill

@item d v
Display a @samp{cvs diff} between the selected files and the head
revision of the vendor branch in the repository.
(@code{cvs-mode-diff-vendor}).@refill

@end table

By default, @samp{diff} commands ignore the marks.  This can be changed
with @code{cvs-invert-ignore-marks}.

@node Invoking Ediff, Updating files, Viewing differences, Commands
@section Running ediff
@cindex Ediff
@cindex Invoking ediff
@cindex Viewing differences
@cindex Conflicts, resolving
@cindex Resolving conflicts
@kindex e - invoke @samp{ediff}
@findex cvs-mode-idiff
@findex cvs-mode-imerge

@table @kbd
@item d e
This command uses ediff (or emerge depending on
@samp{cvs-idiff-imerge-handlers}) to allow you to view diffs.
If a prefix argument is given, PCL-CVS will prompt for a revision against
which the diff should be made, else the default will be to use the BASE
revision.

@item d E
This command use ediff (or emerge, see above) to allow you to do an
interactive 3-way merge.

@strong{Note:}  When the file status is @samp{Conflict},
CVS has already performed a merge.  The resulting file is not used in
any way if you use this command.  If you use the @kbd{q} command inside
@samp{ediff} (to successfully terminate a merge) the file that CVS
created will be overwritten.@refill

@end table

@node Updating files, Tagging files, Invoking Ediff, Commands
@section Updating files
@findex cvs-mode-update
@cindex Updating files
@kindex O - update files

@table @kbd
@item O
Update all selected files with status @samp{Need-update} by running
@samp{cvs update} on them.  (@code{cvs-mode-update}).
@end table


@node Tagging files, Miscellaneous commands, Updating files, Commands
@section Tagging files
@findex cvs-mode-tag
@findex cvs-mode-untag
@findex cvs-rtag
@cindex Tagging files
@kindex M-t - repository tag files
@kindex t - tag files
@vindex cvs-invert-ignore-marks
@vindex cvs-force-dir-tag

@table @kbd
@item t
Tag all selected files by running @samp{cvs tag} on
them. (@code{cvs-mode-tag}).  It's usually preferable to tag directories
at a time.  Rather than selecting all files (which too often doesn't
select all files but only the few that are displayed), clear the
selection with @kbd{M-DEL} (@code{cvs-mode-unmark-all-files}), position
the cursor on the directory you want to tag and hit @kbd{t}.

@end table

By default, @samp{tag} commands ignore the marks.  This can be changed
with @code{cvs-invert-ignore-marks}.  Also by default @samp{tag} can
only be applied to directories, see @code{cvs-force-dir-tag} if you want
to change this behavior.


@node Miscellaneous commands,  , Tagging files, Commands
@section Miscellaneous commands
@findex cvs-mode-byte-compile-files
@cindex Recompiling elisp files
@cindex Byte compilation
@findex cvs-mode-delete-lock
@cindex Getting rid of lock files
@cindex Lock files
@kindex q - quit PCL-CVS
@findex cvs-mode-quit
@cindex Quitting
@kindex h - help
@kindex ? - help
@findex cvs-help
@cindex Help

@table @kbd
@item M-x cvs-mode-byte-compile-files
Byte compile all selected files that end in .el.

@item M-x cvs-mode-delete-lock
This command deletes the lock files that
the *cvs* buffer informs you about.  You should normally never have to
use this command since CVS tries very carefully to always remove the
lock files itself.

You can only use this command when a message in the *cvs* buffer tells
you so.  You should wait a while before using this command in case
someone else is running a cvs command.

Also note that this only works if the repository is local.

@item ?
@itemx h
Show a summary of common command key bindings in the echo
area. (@code{cvs-help}).

@item q
Quit PCL-CVS, killing the @samp{*cvs*} buffer. (@code{cvs-mode-quit}).

@end table

@node Log Edit Mode, Log View Mode, Commands, Top
@chapter Editing a Log Message

@node Log View Mode, CVS Status Mode, Log Edit Mode, Top
@chapter Browsing a Log of Changes

@node CVS Status Mode, Customization, Log View Mode, Top
@chapter Viewing CVS' Status output

@node Customization, Bugs, CVS Status Mode, Top
@chapter Customization
@vindex log-edit-changelog-full-paragraphs (variable)
@vindex cvs-auto-remove-handled (variable)
@vindex cvs-auto-remove-directories (variable)
@vindex cvs-update-prog-output-skip-regexp (variable)
@vindex cvs-cvsroot (variable)
@vindex cvs-auto-revert (variable)
@vindex log-edit-require-final-newline (variable)
@vindex cvs-sort-ignore-file (variable)
@cindex Customization
@cindex Variables, list of all
@cindex Erasing the input buffer
@cindex Context diff, how to get
@cindex Unidiff, how to get
@cindex Automatically remove handled files
@cindex -u option in modules file
@cindex Modules file (-u option)
@cindex Update program (-u option in modules file)
@cindex Reverting buffers after commit
@cindex Require final newline
@cindex Automatically inserting newline
@cindex Commit message, inserting newline
@cindex Sorting the .cvsignore file
@cindex .cvsignore file, sorting
@cindex Automatically sorting .cvsignore

If you have an idea about any customization that would be handy but
isn't present in this list, please tell me!
For info on how to reach me, see @xref{Bugs}.@refill

@table @samp
@item cvs-auto-remove-handled
If this variable is set to any non-@code{nil} value
@samp{cvs-mode-remove-handled} will be called every time you check in
files, after the check-in is ready.  @xref{Removing handled
entries}.@refill

@item cvs-auto-remove-directories
If this variable is set to any non-@code{nil} value, directories that do
not contain any files to be checked in will not be listed in the
@samp{*cvs*} buffer.@refill

@item cvs-auto-revert
If this variable is set to any non-@samp{nil} value any buffers you have
that visit a file that is committed will be automatically reverted.
This variable defaults to @samp{t}. @xref{Committing changes}.@refill

@item cvs-update-prog-output-skip-regexp
The @samp{-u} flag in the @file{modules} file can be used to run a command
whenever a @samp{cvs update} is performed (see cvs(5)).  This regexp
is used to search for the last line in that output.  It is normally set
to @samp{"$"}.  That setting is only correct if the command outputs
nothing.  Note that PCL-CVS will get very confused if the command
outputs @emph{anything} to @samp{stderr}.

@item cvs-cvsroot
This variable can be set to override @samp{CVSROOT}.  It should be a
string. If it is set then every time a cvs command is run it will be
called as @samp{cvs -d @var{cvs-cvsroot}@dots{}}  This can be useful if
your site has several repositories.

@item log-edit-require-final-newline
When you enter a log message in the @samp{*cvs-commit-message*} buffer
PCL-CVS will normally automatically insert a trailing newline, unless
there already is one.  This behavior can be controlled via
@samp{cvs-commit-buffer-require-final-newline}.  If it is @samp{t} (the
default behavior), a newline will always be appended.  If it is
@samp{nil}, newlines will never be appended.  Any other value causes
PCL-CVS to ask the user whenever there is no trailing newline in the
commit message buffer.

@item log-edit-changelog-full-paragraphs
If this variable is non-@code{nil}, include full ChangeLog paragraphs in
the CVS log created by @samp{cvs-mode-changelog-commit}. 
This may be set in the local variables section of a ChangeLog, to
indicate the policy for that ChangeLog.

A ChangeLog paragraph is a bunch of log text containing no blank lines;
a paragraph usually describes a set of changes with a single purpose,
but perhaps spanning several functions in several files.  Changes in
different paragraphs are unrelated.

You could argue that the CVS log entry for a file should contain the
full ChangeLog paragraph mentioning the change to the file, even though
it may mention other files, because that gives you the full context you
need to understand the change.  This is the behavior you get when this
variable is set to t, the default.

On the other hand, you could argue that the CVS log entry for a change
should contain only the text for the changes which occurred in that
file, because the CVS log is per-file.  This is the behavior you get
when this variable is set to nil.

@item cvs-sort-ignore-file
If this variable is set to any non-@samp{nil} value the
@file{.cvsignore} will always be sorted whenever you use
@samp{cvs-mode-ignore} to add a file to it.  This option is on by
default.

@end table


@menu
* Customizing Faces::           
@end menu

@node Customizing Faces,  , Customization, Customization
@section Customizing Faces
@vindex cvs-header-face (face)
@vindex cvs-filename-face (face)
@vindex cvs-unknown-face (face)
@vindex cvs-handled-face (face)
@vindex cvs-need-action-face (face)
@vindex cvs-marked-face (face)

The Emacs lisp file @file{pcl-cvs-xemacs.el} included with PCL-CVS adds
a few extra features for XEmacs, including menus, mouse bindings, and
fontification the the @samp{*cvs*} buffer.  The faces defined for
fontification are listed below:

@table @samp

@item cvs-header-face
This face is used to highlight directory changes.

@item cvs-filename-face
This face is used to highlight file names.

@item cvs-unknown-face
This face is used to highlight the status of files which are UNKNOWN.

@item cvs-handled-face
This face is used to highlight the status of files which are handled and 
need no further action.

@item cvs-need-action-face
This face is used to highlight the status of files which still need action.

@item cvs-marked-face
This face is used to highlight the marked file indicator (@samp{*}).

@end table


@node   Bugs, Function and Variable Index, Customization, Top
@chapter Bugs (known and unknown)
@cindex Reporting bugs and ideas
@cindex Bugs, how to report them
@cindex Author, how to reach
@cindex Email to the author
@cindex Known bugs
@cindex Bugs, known
@cindex FAQ
@cindex Problems, list of common

If you find a bug or misfeature, don't hesitate to tell us!  Send email
to @samp{bugs-gnu-emacs@@gnu.org} which gatewayed to the newsgroup
@samp{gnu.emacs.bugs}.  Feature requests should also be sent there.  We
prefer discussing one thing at a time.  If you find several unrelated
bugs, please report them separately.  If you are running PCL-CVS under
XEmacs, you should also send a copy of bug reports to
@samp{xemacs-beta@@xemacs.org}.

If you have problems using PCL-CVS or other questions,
@samp{help-gnu-emacs@@gnu.org} also gatewayed to @samp{gnu.emacs.help}
is a good place to get help as well as @samp{cvs-info@@gnu.org}
yet again gatewayed to @samp{gnu.cvs.help}.

If you have ideas for improvements, or if you have written some
extensions to this package, we would like to hear from you.  We hope that
you find this package useful!

Below is a partial list of currently known problems with PCL-CVS version
2.0.

@table @asis
@item Unexpected output from CVS
Unexpected output from CVS may confuse PCL-CVS.  It will create
warning messages in the *cvs* buffer alerting you to any parse errors.
If you get these messages, please send a bug report to the email
addresses listed above.  Include the contents of the *cvs* buffer, the
output of the CVS process (which should be found in the *cvs-tmp* Emacs
buffer), and the versions of Emacs, PCL-CVS and CVS you are using.

@end table

@node Function and Variable Index, Concept Index, Bugs, Top
@unnumbered Function and Variable Index

@printindex fn

@node     Concept Index, Key Index, Function and Variable Index, Top
@unnumbered Concept Index

@printindex cp

@node     Key Index,  , Concept Index, Top
@unnumbered Key Index

@printindex ky

@setchapternewpage odd
@summarycontents
@contents
@bye
