@c -*-texinfo-*-
@c texi/trampver.texi.  Generated from trampver.texi.in by configure.

@c This is part of the Emacs manual.
@c Copyright (C) 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007
@c   Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c See file emacs.texi for copying conditions.

@c In the Tramp CVS, the version number is auto-frobbed from
@c configure.ac, so you should edit that file and run
@c "autoconf && ./configure" to change the version number.
@set trampver 2.0.55

@c Other flags from configuration
@set prefix /usr/local
@set lispdir /usr/local/share/emacs/site-lisp
@set infodir /usr/local/share/info

@c Formatting of the tramp program name consistent.
@set tramp @sc{tramp}

@c Some flags which make the text independent on the (X)Emacs flavor.
@c "emacs" resp "xemacs" are set in the Makefile.  Default is "emacs".

@ifclear emacs
@ifclear xemacs
@set emacs
@end ifclear
@end ifclear

@c Emacs values.
@ifset emacs
@set emacsname          GNU Emacs
@set emacsdir           emacs
@set ftppackagename     Ange-FTP
@set prefix             /
@set prefixsinglehop
@set postfix            :
@set postfixsinglehop   :
@set postfixmultihop    :
@set emacsothername     XEmacs
@set emacsotherdir      xemacs
@set emacsotherfilename tramp-xemacs.html
@set japanesemanual     tramp_ja-emacs.html
@end ifset

@c XEmacs counterparts.
@ifset xemacs
@set emacsname          XEmacs
@set emacsdir           xemacs
@set ftppackagename     EFS
@set prefix             /[
@set prefixsinglehop    [
@set postfix            ]
@set postfixsinglehop   /
@set postfixmultihop    :
@set emacsothername     GNU Emacs
@set emacsotherdir      emacs
@set emacsotherfilename tramp-emacs.html
@set japanesemanual     tramp_ja-xemacs.html
@end ifset

@ignore
   arch-tag: e0fe322c-e06b-46eb-bb5b-d091b521f41c
@end ignore
