\input texinfo                  @c -*- mode: texinfo -*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename ../../info/epa
@settitle EasyPG Assistant User's Manual
@c %**end of header

@set VERSION 1.0.0

@copying
This file describes EasyPG Assistant.

Copyright @copyright{} 2007, 2008 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.2 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, with no Front-Cover Texts, and with no Back-Cover
Texts.  A copy of the license is included in the section entitled "GNU
Free Documentation License".
@end quotation
@end copying

@dircategory Emacs
@direntry
* EasyPG Assistant: (epa).   An Emacs user interface to GNU Privacy Guard.
@end direntry


@titlepage
@title EasyPG Assistant

@author by Daiki Ueno
@page

@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage
@page

@c @summarycontents
@c @contents

@node Top
@top EasyPG Assistant user's manual

EasyPG Assistant is an Emacs user interface to GNU Privacy Guard
(GnuPG, @pxref{Top, , Top, gnupg, Using the GNU Privacy Guard}).

EasyPG Assistant is a part of the package called EasyPG, an all-in-one
GnuPG interface for Emacs.  EasyPG also contains the library interface
called EasyPG Library.

@noindent
This manual covers EasyPG version @value{VERSION}.

@menu
* Overview::                    
* Quick start::                 
* Commands::               
@end menu

@node  Overview
@chapter Overview

EasyPG Assistant provides the following features.

@itemize @bullet
@item Key management.
@item Cryptographic operations on regions.
@item Cryptographic operations on files.
@item Dired integration.
@item Mail-mode integration.
@item Automatic encryption/decryption of *.gpg files.
@end itemize

@node  Quick start
@chapter Quick start

EasyPG Assistant commands are prefixed by @samp{epa-}.  For example,

@itemize @bullet
@item To browse your keyring, type @kbd{M-x epa-list-keys}

@item To create a cleartext signature of the region, type @kbd{M-x epa-sign-region}

@item To encrypt a file, type @kbd{M-x epa-encrypt-file}
@end itemize

EasyPG Assistant provides several cryptographic features which can be
integrated into other Emacs functionalities.  For example, automatic
encryption/decryption of @samp{*.gpg} files.

To install these features, do @kbd{C-u 1 M-x epa-mode}.  It can also
be turned on by customize.  Try @kbd{M-x customize-variable epa-mode}.

@node Commands
@chapter Commands

This chapter introduces various commands for typical use cases.

@menu
* Key management::              
* Cryptographic operations on regions::  
* Cryptographic operations on files::  
* Dired integration::           
* Mail-mode integration::       
* Encrypting/decrypting *.gpg files::  
@end menu

@node Key management
@section Key management
Probably the first step of using EasyPG Assistant is to browse your
keyring.  @kbd{M-x epa-list-keys} is corresponding to @samp{gpg
--list-keys} from the command line.

@deffn Command epa-list-keys name mode
Show all keys matched with @var{name} from the public keyring.
@end deffn

@noindent
The output looks as follows.

@example
  u A5B6B2D4B15813FE Daiki Ueno <ueno@@unixuser.org>
@end example

@noindent
A character on the leftmost column indicates the trust level of the
key.  If it is @samp{u}, the key is marked as ultimately trusted.  The
second column is the key ID, and the rest is the user ID.

You can move over entries by @key{TAB}.  If you type @key{RET} or
click button1 on an entry, you will see more detailed information
about the key you selected.

@example
 u Daiki Ueno <ueno@@unixuser.org>
 u A5B6B2D4B15813FE 1024bits DSA
	Created: 2001-10-09
	Expires: 2007-09-04
	Capabilities: sign certify
	Fingerprint: 8003 7CD0 0F1A 9400 03CA  50AA A5B6 B2D4 B158 13FE
 u 4447461B2A9BEA2D 2048bits ELGAMAL_E
	Created: 2001-10-09
	Expires: 2007-09-04
	Capabilities: encrypt
	Fingerprint: 9003 D76B 73B7 4A8A E588  10AF 4447 461B 2A9B EA2D
@end example

@noindent
To browse your private keyring, use @kbd{M-x epa-list-secret-keys}.

@deffn Command epa-list-secret-keys name
Show all keys matched with @var{name} from the private keyring.
@end deffn

@noindent
In @samp{*Keys*} buffer, several commands are available.  The common
use case is to export some keys to a file.  To do that, type @kbd{m}
to select keys, type @kbd{o}, and then supply the filename.

Below are other commands related to key management.  Some of them take
a file as input/output, and others take the current region.

@deffn Command epa-insert-keys keys
Insert selected @var{keys} after the point.  It will let you select
keys before insertion.  By default, it will encode keys in the OpenPGP
armor format.
@end deffn

@deffn Command epa-import-keys file
Import keys from @var{file} to your keyring.
@end deffn

@deffn Command epa-import-keys-region start end
Import keys from the current region between @var{start} and @var{end}
to your keyring.
@end deffn

@deffn Command epa-import-armor-in-region start end
Import keys in the OpenPGP armor format in the current region between
@var{start} and @var{end}.  The difference from
@code{epa-import-keys-region} is that
@code{epa-import-armor-in-region} searches armors in the region and
applies @code{epa-import-keys-region} to each of them.
@end deffn

@deffn Command epa-delete-keys allow-secret
Delete selected keys.  If @var{allow-secret} is non-@code{nil}, it
also delete the secret keys.
@end deffn

@node Cryptographic operations on regions
@section Cryptographic operations on regions

@deffn Command epa-decrypt-region start end
Decrypt the current region between @var{start} and @var{end}.  It
replaces the region with the decrypted text.
@end deffn

@deffn Command epa-decrypt-armor-in-region start end
Decrypt OpenPGP armors in the current region between @var{start} and
@var{end}.  The difference from @code{epa-decrypt-region} is that
@code{epa-decrypt-armor-in-region} searches armors in the region
and applies @code{epa-decrypt-region} to each of them.  That is, this
command does not alter the original text around armors.
@end deffn

@deffn Command epa-verify-region start end
Verify the current region between @var{start} and @var{end}.  It sends
the verification result to the minibuffer or a popup window.  It
replaces the region with the signed text.
@end deffn

@deffn Command epa-verify-cleartext-in-region
Verify OpenPGP cleartext blocks in the current region between
@var{start} and @var{end}.  The difference from
@code{epa-verify-region} is that @code{epa-verify-cleartext-in-region}
searches OpenPGP cleartext blocks in the region and applies
@code{epa-verify-region} to each of them.  That is, this command does
not alter the original text around OpenPGP cleartext blocks.
@end deffn

@deffn Command epa-sign-region start end signers type
Sign the current region between @var{start} and @var{end}.  By
default, it creates a cleartext signature.  If a prefix argument is
given, it will let you select signing keys, and then a signature
type.
@end deffn

@deffn Command epa-encrypt-region start end recipients sign signers
Encrypt the current region between @var{start} and @var{end}.  It will
let you select recipients.  If a prefix argument is given, it will
also ask you whether or not to sign the text before encryption and if
you answered yes, it will let you select the signing keys.
@end deffn

@node Cryptographic operations on files
@section Cryptographic operations on files

@deffn Command epa-decrypt-file file
Decrypt @var{file}.
@end deffn

@deffn Command epa-verify-file file
Verify @var{file}.
@end deffn

@deffn Command epa-sign-file file signers type
Sign @var{file}.  If a prefix argument is given, it will let you
select signing keys, and then a signature type.
@end deffn

@deffn Command epa-encrypt-file file recipients
Encrypt @var{file}.  It will let you select recipients.
@end deffn

@node Dired integration
@section Dired integration

EasyPG Assistant extends Dired Mode for GNU Emacs to allow users to
easily do cryptographic operations on files.  For example,

@example
M-x dired
(mark some files)
: e (or M-x epa-dired-do-encrypt)
(select recipients by 'm' and click [OK])
@end example

@noindent
The following keys are assigned.

@table @kbd
@item : d
@kindex @kbd{: d}
@findex epa-dired-do-decrypt
Decrypt marked files.

@item : v
@kindex @kbd{: v}
@findex epa-dired-do-verify
Verify marked files.

@item : s
@kindex @kbd{: s}
@findex epa-dired-do-sign
Sign marked files.

@item : e
@kindex @kbd{: e}
@findex epa-dired-do-encrypt
Encrypt marked files.

@end table

@node Mail-mode integration
@section Mail-mode integration

EasyPG Assistant provides a minor mode to help user compose inline PGP
messages.  Inline PGP is sending the OpenPGP blobs directly inside a
mail message and it is not recommended and you should consider to use
PGP/MIME.  See
@uref{http://josefsson.org/inline-openpgp-considered-harmful.html,
Inline PGP in E-mail is bad, Mm'kay?}.

@noindent
The following keys are assigned.

@table @kbd
@item C-c C-e d
@kindex @kbd{C-c C-e d}
@findex epa-mail-decrypt
Decrypt OpenPGP armors in the current buffer.

@item C-c C-e v
@kindex @kbd{C-c C-e v}
@findex epa-mail-verify
Verify OpenPGP cleartext signed messages in the current buffer.

@item C-c C-e s
@kindex @kbd{C-c C-e s}
@findex epa-mail-sign
Compose a signed message from the current buffer.

@item C-c C-e e
@kindex @kbd{C-c C-e e}
@findex epa-mail-encrypt
Compose an encrypted message from the current buffer.

@end table

@node Encrypting/decrypting *.gpg files
@section Encrypting/decrypting *.gpg files
Once @code{epa-setup} is loaded, every file whose extension is
@samp{.gpg} will be treated as encrypted.  That is, when you attempt
to open such a file which already exists, the decrypted text is
inserted in the buffer rather than encrypted one.  On the other hand,
when you attempt to save the buffer to a file whose extension is
@samp{.gpg}, encrypted data is written.

If you want to temporarily disable this behavior, use @kbd{M-x
epa-file-disable}, and then to enable this behavior use @kbd{M-x
epa-file-enable}.

@deffn Command epa-file-disable
Disable automatic encryption/decryption of *.gpg files.
@end deffn

@deffn Command epa-file-enable
Enable automatic encryption/decryption of *.gpg files.
@end deffn

@noindent
@code{epa-file} will let you select recipients.  If you want to
suppress this question, it might be a good idea to put the following
line on the first line of the text being encrypted.
@vindex epa-file-encrypt-to

@cartouche
@lisp
;; -*- epa-file-encrypt-to: ("ueno@@unixuser.org") -*-
@end lisp
@end cartouche

The file name extension of encrypted files can be controlled by
@var{epa-file-name-regexp}.

@defvar epa-file-name-regexp
Regexp which matches filenames treated as encrypted.
@end defvar

Other variables which control the automatic encryption/decryption
behavior are below.

@defvar epa-file-cache-passphrase-for-symmetric-encryption
If non-@code{nil}, cache passphrase for symmetric encryption.  The
default value is @code{nil}.
@end defvar

@defvar epa-file-inhibit-auto-save
If non-@code{nil}, disable auto-saving when opening an encrypted file.
The default value is @code{t}.
@end defvar

@bye

@c End:

@ignore
   arch-tag: 7404e246-7d4c-4db4-9332-c1293a455a4f
@end ignore
