\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename ../../info/eww.info
@settitle Emacs Web Wowser
@include docstyle.texi
@c %**end of header

@copying
This file documents the GNU Emacs Web Wowser (EWW) package.

Copyright @copyright{} 2014--2018 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, with the Front-Cover Texts being ``A GNU Manual,''
and with the Back-Cover Texts as in (a) below.  A copy of the license
is included in the section entitled ``GNU Free Documentation License.''

(a) The FSF's Back-Cover Text is: ``You have the freedom to copy and
modify this GNU manual.''
@end quotation
@end copying

@dircategory Emacs misc features
@direntry
* EWW: (eww).      Emacs Web Wowser
@end direntry

@finalout

@titlepage
@title Emacs Web Wowser (EWW)
@subtitle A web browser for GNU Emacs.

@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top EWW

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Overview::
* Basics::
* Advanced::

Appendices
* History and Acknowledgments::
* GNU Free Documentation License::  The license for this documentation.

Indices
* Key Index::
* Variable Index::
* Lisp Function Index::
* Concept Index::
@end menu

@node Overview
@chapter Overview
@dfn{EWW}, the Emacs Web Wowser, is a web browser for GNU Emacs.  It
can load, parse, and display various web pages using @dfn{shr.el}.
However a GNU Emacs with @code{libxml2} support is required.

@node Basics
@chapter Basic Usage

@findex eww
@findex eww-open-file
@vindex eww-search-prefix
@cindex eww
@cindex Web Browsing
  You can open a URL or search the web with the command @kbd{M-x eww}.
If the input doesn't look like a URL or domain name the web will be
searched via @code{eww-search-prefix}.  The default search engine is
@url{https://duckduckgo.com, DuckDuckGo}.  If you want to open a file
either prefix the file name with @code{file://} or use the command
@kbd{M-x eww-open-file}.

@findex eww-quit
@findex eww-reload
@findex eww-copy-page-url
@kindex q
@kindex w
@kindex g
  If loading the URL was successful the buffer @file{*eww*} is opened
and the web page is rendered in it.  You can leave EWW by pressing
@kbd{q} or exit the browser by calling @kbd{eww-quit}.  To reload the
web page hit @kbd{g} (@code{eww-reload}).  Pressing @kbd{w}
(@code{eww-copy-page-url}) will copy the current URL to the kill ring.

@findex eww-open-in-new-buffer
@kindex M-@key{RET}
  The @kbd{M-@key{RET}} command (@code{eww-open-in-new-buffer}) opens the
URL at point in a new EWW buffer, akin to opening a link in a new
``tab'' in other browsers.

@findex eww-readable
@kindex R
  The @kbd{R} command (@code{eww-readable}) will attempt to determine
which part of the document contains the ``readable'' text, and will
only display this part.  This usually gets rid of menus and the like.

@findex eww-toggle-fonts
@findex shr-use-fonts
@kindex F
  The @kbd{F} command (@code{eww-toggle-fonts}) toggles whether to use
variable-pitch fonts or not.  This sets the @code{shr-use-fonts} variable.

@findex eww-toggle-colors
@findex shr-use-colors
@kindex F
  The @kbd{C} command (@code{eww-toggle-colors}) toggles whether to use
HTML-specified colors or not.  This sets the @code{shr-use-colors} variable.

@findex eww-download
@vindex eww-download-directory
@kindex d
@cindex Download
  A URL under the point can be downloaded with @kbd{d}
(@code{eww-download}).  The file will be written to the directory
specified in @code{eww-download-directory} (Default: @file{~/Downloads/}).

@findex eww-back-url
@findex eww-forward-url
@findex eww-list-histories
@kindex r
@kindex l
@kindex H
@cindex History
  EWW remembers the URLs you have visited to allow you to go back and
forth between them.  By pressing @kbd{l} (@code{eww-back-url}) you go
to the previous URL@.  You can go forward again with @kbd{r}
(@code{eww-forward-url}).  If you want an overview of your browsing
history press @kbd{H} (@code{eww-list-histories}) to open the history
buffer @file{*eww history*}.  The history is lost when EWW is quit.
If you want to remember websites you can use bookmarks.

@vindex eww-history-limit
  Along with the URLs visited, EWW also remembers both the rendered
page (as it appears in the buffer) and its source.  This can take a
considerable amount of memory, so EWW discards the history entries to
keep their number within a set limit, as specified by
@code{eww-history-limit}; the default being 50.  This variable could
also be set to @code{nil} to allow for the history list to grow
indefinitely.

@cindex PDF
  PDFs are viewed inline, by default, with @code{doc-view-mode}, but
this can be customized by using the mailcap (@pxref{mailcap,,,
emacs-mime, Emacs MIME Manual})
mechanism, in particular @code{mailcap-mime-data}.

@findex eww-add-bookmark
@findex eww-list-bookmarks
@kindex b
@kindex B
@cindex Bookmarks
  EWW allows you to @dfn{bookmark} URLs.  Simply hit @kbd{b}
(@code{eww-add-bookmark}) to store a bookmark for the current website.
You can view stored bookmarks with @kbd{B}
(@code{eww-list-bookmarks}).  This will open the bookmark buffer
@file{*eww bookmarks*}.

@findex eww-switch-to-buffer
@findex eww-list-buffers
@kindex s
@kindex S
@cindex Multiple Buffers
  To get summary of currently opened EWW buffers, press @kbd{S}
(@code{eww-list-buffers}).  The @file{*eww buffers*} buffer allows you
to quickly kill, flip through and switch to specific EWW buffer.  To
switch EWW buffers through a minibuffer prompt, press @kbd{s}
(@code{eww-switch-to-buffer}).

@findex eww-browse-with-external-browser
@vindex shr-external-browser
@vindex eww-use-external-browser-for-content-type
@kindex &
@cindex External Browser
  Although EWW and shr.el do their best to render webpages in GNU
Emacs some websites use features which can not be properly represented
or are not implemented (E.g., JavaScript).  If you have trouble
viewing a website with EWW then hit @kbd{&}
(@code{eww-browse-with-external-browser}) inside the EWW buffer to
open the website in the external browser specified by
@code{shr-external-browser}.  Some content types, such as video or
audio content, do not make sense to display in GNU Emacs at all.  You
can tell EWW to open specific content automatically in an external
browser by customizing
@code{eww-use-external-browser-for-content-type}.

@node Advanced
@chapter Advanced

@findex eww-view-source
@kindex v
@cindex Viewing Source
  You can view the source of a website with @kbd{v}
(@code{eww-view-source}).  This will open a new buffer
@file{*eww-source*} and insert the source.  The buffer will be set to
@code{html-mode} if available.

@findex url-cookie-list
@kindex C
@cindex Cookies
  EWW handles cookies through the @ref{Top, url package, ,url}.
You can list existing cookies with @kbd{C} (@code{url-cookie-list}).
For details about the Cookie handling @xref{Cookies,,,url}.

@vindex eww-header-line-format
@cindex Header
  The header line of the EWW buffer can be changed by customizing
@code{eww-header-line-format}.  The format replaces @code{%t} with the
title of the website and @code{%u} with the URL.

@findex eww-toggle-paragraph-direction
@cindex paragraph direction
  The @kbd{D} command (@code{eww-toggle-paragraph-direction}) toggles
the paragraphs direction between left-to-right and right-to-left
text.  This can be useful on web pages that display right-to-left test
(like Arabic and Hebrew), but where the web pages don't explicitly
state the directionality.

@c @vindex shr-bullet
@c @vindex shr-hr-line
@c @vindex eww-form-checkbox-selected-symbol
@c @vindex eww-form-checkbox-symbol
@c   EWW and the rendering engine shr.el use ASCII characters to
@c represent some graphical elements, such as bullet points
@c (@code{shr-bullet}), check boxes
@c (@code{eww-form-checkbox-selected-symbol} and
@c @code{eww-form-checkbox-symbol}), and horizontal rules
@c @code{shr-hr-line}).  Depending on your fonts these characters can be
@c replaced by Unicode glyphs to achieve better looking results.

@vindex shr-max-image-proportion
@vindex shr-blocked-images
@cindex Image Display
  Loading random images from the web can be problematic due to their
size or content.  By customizing @code{shr-max-image-proportion} you
can set the maximal image proportion in relation to the window they
are displayed in.  E.g., 0.7 means an image is allowed to take up 70%
of the width and height.  If Emacs supports image scaling (ImageMagick
support required) then larger images are scaled down.  You can block
specific images completely by customizing @code{shr-blocked-images}.

@vindex shr-color-visible-distance-min
@vindex shr-color-visible-luminance-min
@cindex Contrast
  EWW (or rather its HTML renderer @code{shr}) uses the colors declared
in the HTML page, but adjusts them if needed to keep a certain minimum
contrast.  If that is still too low for you, you can customize the
variables @code{shr-color-visible-distance-min} and
@code{shr-color-visible-luminance-min} to get a better contrast.

@cindex Desktop Support
@cindex Saving Sessions
  In addition to maintaining the history at run-time, EWW will also
save the partial state of its buffers (the URIs and the titles of the
pages visited) in the desktop file if one is used.  @xref{Saving Emacs
Sessions,,, emacs, The GNU Emacs Manual}.

@vindex eww-desktop-remove-duplicates
  EWW history may sensibly contain multiple entries for the same page
URI@.  At run-time, these entries may still have different associated
point positions or the actual Web page contents.
The latter, however, tend to be overly large to preserve in the
desktop file, so they get omitted, thus rendering the respective
entries entirely equivalent.  By default, such duplicate entries are
not saved.  Setting @code{eww-desktop-remove-duplicates} to nil will
force EWW to save them anyway.

@vindex eww-restore-desktop
  Restoring EWW buffers' contents may prove to take too long to
finish.  When the @code{eww-restore-desktop} variable is set to
@code{nil} (the default), EWW will not try to reload the last visited
Web page when the buffer is restored from the desktop file, thus
allowing for faster Emacs start-up times.  When set to @code{t},
restoring the buffers will also initiate the reloading of such pages.

@vindex eww-restore-reload-prompt
  The EWW buffer restored from the desktop file but not yet reloaded
will contain a prompt, as specified by the
@code{eww-restore-reload-prompt} variable.  The value of this variable
will be passed through @code{substitute-command-keys} upon each use,
thus allowing for the use of the usual substitutions, such as
@code{\[eww-reload]} for the current key binding of the
@code{eww-reload} command.

@node History and Acknowledgments
@appendix History and Acknowledgments

EWW was originally written by Lars Ingebrigtsen, known for his work on
Gnus.  He started writing an Emacs HTML rendering library,
@code{shr.el}, to read blogs in Gnus.  He eventually added a web
browser front end and HTML form support.  Which resulted in EWW, the
Emacs Web Wowser.  EWW was announced on 16 June 2013:
@url{http://lars.ingebrigtsen.no/2013/06/16/eww/}.

EWW was then moved from the Gnus repository to GNU Emacs and several
developers started contributing to it as well.

@node GNU Free Documentation License
@chapter GNU Free Documentation License
@include doclicense.texi

@node Key Index
@unnumbered Key Index

@printindex ky

@node Variable Index
@unnumbered Variable Index

@vindex eww-after-render-hook
After eww has rendered the data in the buffer,
@code{eww-after-render-hook} is called.  It can be used to alter the
contents, for instance.

@printindex vr

@node Lisp Function Index
@unnumbered Function Index

@printindex fn

@node Concept Index
@unnumbered Concept Index

@printindex cp


@bye
