@c -*-texinfo-*-
@c texi/trampver.texi.  Generated from trampver.texi.in by configure.

@c This is part of the Emacs manual.
@c Copyright (C) 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009,
@c   2010 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c See file doclicense.texi for copying conditions.

@c In the Tramp CVS, the version number is auto-frobbed from
@c configure.ac, so you should edit that file and run
@c "autoconf && ./configure" to change the version number.
@set trampver 2.1.19

@c Other flags from configuration
@set instprefix /usr/local
@set lispdir /usr/local/share/emacs/site-lisp
@set infodir /usr/local/share/info

@c Formatting of the tramp program name consistent.
@set tramp @sc{tramp}

@c Whether or not describe GVFS integration.
@ifclear noemacsgvfs
@set emacsgvfs
@end ifclear

@c Whether or not describe gateway methods.
@ifclear noemacsgw
@set emacsgw
@end ifclear

@c Whether or not describe IMAP support.
@ifclear noemacsimap
@set emacsimap
@end ifclear

@c Some flags which make the text independent on the (X)Emacs flavor.
@c "emacs" resp "xemacs" are set in the Makefile.  Default is "emacs".
@ifclear emacs
@ifclear xemacs
@set emacs
@end ifclear
@end ifclear

@c Emacs values.
@ifset emacs
@set emacsname          GNU Emacs
@set emacsdir           emacs
@set ftppackagename     Ange-FTP
@set prefix             /
@set prefixhop
@set postfix            :
@set postfixhop         :
@set ipv6prefix         [
@set ipv6postfix        ]
@set emacsothername     XEmacs
@set emacsotherdir      xemacs
@set emacsotherfilename tramp-xemacs.html
@set japanesemanual     tramp_ja-emacs.html
@end ifset

@c XEmacs counterparts.
@ifset xemacs
@set emacsname          XEmacs
@set emacsdir           xemacs
@set ftppackagename     EFS
@set prefix             /[
@set prefixhop          [
@set postfix            ]
@set postfixhop         /
@set ipv6prefix
@set ipv6postfix
@set emacsothername     GNU Emacs
@set emacsotherdir      emacs
@set emacsotherfilename tramp-emacs.html
@set japanesemanual     tramp_ja-xemacs.html
@end ifset

@ignore
   arch-tag: e0fe322c-e06b-46eb-bb5b-d091b521f41c
@end ignore
