@c -*-texinfo-*-
@c This is part of the GNU Emacs Lisp Reference Manual.
@c Copyright (C) 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993, 1998, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2004,
@c   2005, 2006, 2007  Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c See the file elisp.texi for copying conditions.
@setfilename ../info/hooks
@node Standard Hooks, Index, Standard Keymaps, Top
@appendix Standard Hooks
@cindex standard hooks
@cindex hook variables, list of

The following is a list of hook variables that let you provide
functions to be called from within Emacs on suitable occasions.

Most of these variables have names ending with @samp{-hook}.  They are
@dfn{normal hooks}, run by means of @code{run-hooks}.  The value of such
a hook is a list of functions; the functions are called with no
arguments and their values are completely ignored.  The recommended way
to put a new function on such a hook is to call @code{add-hook}.
@xref{Hooks}, for more information about using hooks.

Every major mode defines a mode hook named
@samp{@var{modename}-mode-hook}.  The major mode command runs this
normal hook with @code{run-mode-hooks} as the very last thing it does.
@xref{Mode Hooks}.  Most minor modes have mode hooks too.  Mode hooks
are omitted in the list below.

The variables whose names end in @samp{-hooks} or @samp{-functions} are
usually @dfn{abnormal hooks}; their values are lists of functions, but
these functions are called in a special way (they are passed arguments,
or their values are used). The variables whose names end in
@samp{-function} have single functions as their values.

@c We need to xref to where each hook is documented or else document
@c it here.

@table @code
@item activate-mark-hook
@xref{The Mark}.

@item after-change-functions
@xref{Change Hooks}.

@item after-change-major-mode-hook
@xref{Mode Hooks}.

@item after-init-hook
@xref{Init File}.

@item after-insert-file-functions
@xref{Saving Properties}.

@item after-make-frame-functions
@xref{Creating Frames}.

@item after-revert-hook
@xref{Reverting}.

@item after-save-hook
@xref{Saving Buffers}.

@item auto-fill-function
@xref{Auto Filling}.

@item auto-save-hook
@xref{Auto-Saving}.

@item before-change-functions
@xref{Change Hooks}.

@item before-init-hook
@xref{Init File}.

@item before-make-frame-hook
@xref{Creating Frames}.

@item before-revert-hook
@xref{Reverting}.

@item before-save-hook
@xref{Saving Buffers}.

@item blink-paren-function
@xref{Blinking}.

@item buffer-access-fontify-functions
@xref{Lazy Properties}.

@item calendar-load-hook
@iftex
@inforef{Calendar Customizing,, emacs-xtra}.
@end iftex
@ifnottex
@xref{Calendar Customizing,,, emacs}.
@end ifnottex


@item change-major-mode-hook
@xref{Creating Buffer-Local}.

@item command-line-functions
@xref{Command-Line Arguments}.

@item comment-indent-function
@xref{Options for Comments,, Options Controlling Comments, emacs, the
GNU Emacs Manual}.

@item compilation-finish-functions
Functions to call when a compilation process finishes.

@item custom-define-hook
Hook called after defining each customize option.

@item deactivate-mark-hook
@xref{The Mark}.

@item desktop-after-read-hook
Normal hook run after a successful @code{desktop-read}.  May be used
to show a buffer list.  @xref{Saving Emacs Sessions,, Saving Emacs
Sessions, emacs, the GNU Emacs Manual}.

@item desktop-no-desktop-file-hook
Normal hook run when @code{desktop-read} can't find a desktop file.
May be used to show a dired buffer.  @xref{Saving Emacs Sessions,,
Saving Emacs Sessions, emacs, the GNU Emacs Manual}.

@item desktop-save-hook
Normal hook run before the desktop is saved in a desktop file.  This
is useful for truncating history lists, for example.  @xref{Saving
Emacs Sessions,, Saving Emacs Sessions, emacs, the GNU Emacs Manual}.

@item diary-display-hook
@iftex
@inforef{Fancy Diary Display,, emacs-xtra}.
@end iftex
@ifnottex
@xref{Fancy Diary Display,,, emacs}.
@end ifnottex

@item diary-hook
List of functions called after the display of the diary.  Can be used
for appointment notification.

@item disabled-command-function
@xref{Disabling Commands}.

@item echo-area-clear-hook
@xref{Echo Area Customization}.

@item emacs-startup-hook
@xref{Init File}.

@item find-file-hook
@xref{Visiting Functions}.

@item find-file-not-found-functions
@xref{Visiting Functions}.

@item first-change-hook
@xref{Change Hooks}.

@item font-lock-beginning-of-syntax-function
@xref{Syntactic Font Lock}.

@item font-lock-fontify-buffer-function
@xref{Other Font Lock Variables}.

@item font-lock-fontify-region-function
@xref{Other Font Lock Variables}.

@item font-lock-mark-block-function
@xref{Other Font Lock Variables}.

@item font-lock-syntactic-face-function
@xref{Syntactic Font Lock}.

@item font-lock-unfontify-buffer-function
@xref{Other Font Lock Variables}.

@item font-lock-unfontify-region-function
@xref{Other Font Lock Variables}.

@item initial-calendar-window-hook
@iftex
@inforef{Calendar Customizing,, emacs-xtra}.
@end iftex
@ifnottex
@xref{Calendar Customizing,,, emacs}.
@end ifnottex

@item kbd-macro-termination-hook
@xref{Keyboard Macros}.

@item kill-buffer-hook
@xref{Killing Buffers}.

@item kill-buffer-query-functions
@xref{Killing Buffers}.

@item kill-emacs-hook
@xref{Killing Emacs}.

@item kill-emacs-query-functions
@xref{Killing Emacs}.

@item lisp-indent-function

@item list-diary-entries-hook
@iftex
@inforef{Fancy Diary Display,, emacs-xtra}.
@end iftex
@ifnottex
@xref{Fancy Diary Display,,, emacs}.
@end ifnottex

@item mail-setup-hook
@xref{Mail Mode Misc,, Mail Mode Miscellany, emacs, the GNU Emacs
Manual}.

@item mark-diary-entries-hook
@iftex
@inforef{Fancy Diary Display,, emacs-xtra}.
@end iftex
@ifnottex
@xref{Fancy Diary Display,,, emacs}.
@end ifnottex

@item menu-bar-update-hook
@xref{Menu Bar}.

@item minibuffer-setup-hook
@xref{Minibuffer Misc}.

@item minibuffer-exit-hook
@xref{Minibuffer Misc}.

@item mouse-position-function
@xref{Mouse Position}.

@item nongregorian-diary-listing-hook
@iftex
@inforef{Hebrew/Islamic Entries,, emacs-xtra}.
@end iftex
@ifnottex
@xref{Hebrew/Islamic Entries,,, emacs}.
@end ifnottex

@item nongregorian-diary-marking-hook
@iftex
@inforef{Hebrew/Islamic Entries,, emacs-xtra}.
@end iftex
@ifnottex
@xref{Hebrew/Islamic Entries,,, emacs}.
@end ifnottex

@item occur-hook

@item post-command-hook
@xref{Command Overview}.

@item pre-abbrev-expand-hook
@xref{Abbrev Expansion}.

@item pre-command-hook
@xref{Command Overview}.

@item print-diary-entries-hook
@iftex
@inforef{Diary Customizing,, emacs-xtra}.
@end iftex
@ifnottex
@xref{Diary Customizing,,, emacs}.
@end ifnottex

@item redisplay-end-trigger-functions
@xref{Window Hooks}.

@item scheme-indent-function

@item suspend-hook
@xref{Suspending Emacs}.

@item suspend-resume-hook
@xref{Suspending Emacs}.

@item temp-buffer-setup-hook
@xref{Temporary Displays}.

@item temp-buffer-show-function
@xref{Temporary Displays}.

@item temp-buffer-show-hook
@xref{Temporary Displays}.

@item term-setup-hook
@xref{Terminal-Specific}.

@item today-visible-calendar-hook
@iftex
@inforef{Calendar Customizing,, emacs-xtra}.
@end iftex
@ifnottex
@xref{Calendar Customizing,,, emacs}.
@end ifnottex

@item today-invisible-calendar-hook
@iftex
@inforef{Calendar Customizing,, emacs-xtra}.
@end iftex
@ifnottex
@xref{Calendar Customizing,,, emacs}.
@end ifnottex

@item window-configuration-change-hook
@xref{Window Hooks}.

@item window-scroll-functions
@xref{Window Hooks}.

@item window-setup-hook
@xref{Window Systems}.

@item window-size-change-functions
@xref{Window Hooks}.

@item write-contents-functions
@xref{Saving Buffers}.

@item write-file-functions
@xref{Saving Buffers}.

@item write-region-annotate-functions
@xref{Saving Properties}.
@end table

@ignore
   arch-tag: 55fd0296-d906-4551-b300-979d3846aa88
@end ignore
