@c This is part of the Emacs manual.
@c Copyright (C) 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997, 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003,
@c   2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, 2008 Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c See file emacs.texi for copying conditions.
@c
@node Acknowledgments, Screen, Concept Index, Top
@unnumbered Acknowledgments

Many people have contributed code included in the Free Software
Foundation's distribution of GNU Emacs.  To show our appreciation for
their public spirit, we list here in alphabetical order those who have
written substantial portions.  Others too numerous to mention have
reported and fixed bugs, and added features to many parts of Emacs.
We thank them for their generosity as well.

This list intended to mention every contributor of a major package or
feature we currently distribute; if you know of someone we have omitted,
please report that as a manual bug.  More comprehensive information is
available in the @file{ChangeLog} files, summarized in the file
@file{etc/AUTHORS} in the distribution.

@c We should list here anyone who has contributed a new package,
@c and anyone who has made major enhancements in Emacs
@c that many users would notice and consider important.

@itemize @bullet
@item
Per Abrahamsen wrote the customization buffer facilities, as well as
@file{double.el}, for typing accented characters not normally
available from the keyboard; @file{xt-mouse.el}, which allows mouse
commands through Xterm; @file{gnus-cus.el}, which implements
customization commands for Gnus; @file{gnus-cite.el}, a
citation-parsing facility for news articles); and @file{cpp.el}, which
hides or highlights parts of C programs according to preprocessor
conditionals.

@item
Tomas Abrahamsson wrote @file{artist.el}, a package for producing
@acronym{ASCII} art with a mouse or with keyboard keys.

@item
Jay K.@: Adams wrote @file{jka-compr.el}, providing automatic
decompression and recompression for compressed files.

@item
Michael Albinus wrote @file{dbus.el}, a package that implements the
D-Bus message bus protocol; @file{zeroconf.el}, a mode for browsing
Avahi services; and @file{xesam.el}, a Xesam-based search engine
interface.  He and Kai Gro@ss{}johann wrote the Tramp package, which
provides transparent remote file editing using rcp, ssh, ftp, and
other network protocols.

@item
Ralf Angeli wrote @file{scroll-lock.el}, a minor mode which keeps the
point vertically fixed by scrolling the window when moving up and down
in the buffer.

@item
Joe Arceneaux wrote the original text property implementation, and
implemented support for X11.

@item
Miles Bader wrote @file{image-file.el}, support code for visiting
image files; @file{minibuf-eldef.el}, a minor mode that hides the
minibuffer default value when appropriate; @file{button.el}, the
library that implements clickable buttons; and @file{face-remap.el}, a
package for changing the default face in individual buffers.

@item
David Bakhash wrote @file{strokes.el}, a mode for controlling Emacs by
moving the mouse in particular patterns.

@item
Eli Barzilay wrote @file{calculator.el}, a desktop calculator for
Emacs.

@item
Steven L.@: Baur wrote @file{footnote.el} which lets you include
footnotes in email messages, and @file{gnus-audio.el} which provides
sound effects for Gnus.

@item
Alexander L.@: Belikoff, Sergey Berezin, David Edmondson, Andreas Fuchs,
Mario Lang, Gergely Nagy, Michael Olson, and Alex Schroeder wrote ERC,
an advanced Internet Relay Chat client.

@item
Boaz Ben-Zvi wrote @file{profile.el}, to time Emacs Lisp functions.

@item
Scott Bender, Michael Brouwer, Christophe de Dinechin, Carl Edman,
Christian Limpach and Adrian Robert developed and maintained the 
NeXTstep port of Emacs.

@item
Anna M.@: Bigatti wrote @file{cal-html.el}, which produces HTML calendars.

@item
Ray Blaak wrote @file{delphi.el}, a mode for editing Delphi (Object
Pascal) source code.

@item
Martin Blais, Stefan Merten, and David Goodger wrote @file{rst.el}, a
mode for editing reStructuredText documents.

@item
Jim Blandy wrote Emacs 19's input system, brought its configuration and
build process up to the GNU coding standards, and contributed to the
frame support and multi-face support.  Jim also wrote @file{tvi970.el},
terminal support for the TeleVideo 970 terminals.

@item
Per Bothner wrote @file{term.el}, a terminal emulator in an Emacs
buffer.

@item
Terrence M.@: Brannon wrote @file{landmark.el}, a neural-network robot
that learns landmarks.

@item
Frank Bresz wrote @file{diff.el}, a program to display @code{diff}
output.

@item
Peter Breton implemented @file{dirtrack}, a library for tracking
directory changes in shell buffers; @file{filecache.el}, which records
which directories your files are in; @file{locate.el}, which
interfaces to the @code{locate} command; @file{find-lisp.el}, an Emacs
Lisp emulation of the @command{find} program; @file{net-utils.el}; and
the ``generic mode'' feature.

@item
Emmanuel Briot wrote @file{xml.el}, an XML parser for Emacs.

@item
Kevin Broadey wrote @file{foldout.el}, providing folding extensions to
Emacs's outline modes.

@c  @item
@c  Vincent Broman wrote @file{ada.el}, a mode for editing Ada code
@c  (since replaced by @file{ada-mode.el}).

@item
David M.@: Brown wrote @file{array.el}, for editing arrays and other
tabular data.

@item
W@l{}odek Bzyl and Ryszard Kubiak wrote @file{ogonek.el}, a package for
changing the encoding of Polish characters.

@item
Bill Carpenter provided @file{feedmail.el}, a package for massaging
outgoing mail messages and sending them through various popular mailers.

@item
Per Cederqvist and Inge Wallin wrote @file{ewoc.el}, an Emacs widget for
manipulating object collections.

@item
Hans Chalupsky wrote @file{advice.el}, an overloading mechanism for
Emacs Lisp functions, and @file{trace.el}, a tracing facility for Emacs
Lisp.

@item
Chris Chase and Carsten Dominik wrote @file{idlwave.el}, an editing mode
for IDL and WAVE CL.

@item
Bob Chassell wrote @file{texnfo-upd.el} and @file{makeinfo.el}, modes
and utilities for working with Texinfo files; and @file{page-ext.el},
commands for extended page handling.

@item
Jihyun Cho wrote @file{hanja-util.el}, utilities for Korean Hanja.

@item
Andrew Choi and Yamamoto Mitsuharu wrote the Carbon support, used
prior to Emacs 23 for Mac OS.

@item
Chong Yidong was the Emacs co-maintainer for Emacs 23.  He made many
improvements to the Emacs display engine and wrote @file{longlines.el},
a minor mode for wrapping long lines.

@item
James Clark wrote SGML mode, a mode for editing SGML documents; and
nXML mode, a mode for editing XML documents.  He also contributed to
Emacs's dumping procedures.

@item
Mike Clarkson wrote @file{edt.el}, an emulation of DEC's EDT editor.

@item
Glynn Clements provided @file{gamegrid.el} and a couple of games that
use it, Snake and Tetris.

@item
Georges Brun-Cottan and Stefan Monnier wrote @file{easy-mmode.el}, a
package for easy definition of major and minor modes.

@item
Andrew Csillag wrote M4 mode (@file{m4-mode.el}).

@item
Doug Cutting and Jamie Zawinski wrote @file{disass.el}, a disassembler
for compiled Emacs Lisp code.

@item
Mathias Dahl wrote @file{image-dired.el}, a package for viewing image
files as ``thumbnails.''

@item
Michael DeCorte wrote @file{emacs.csh}, a C-shell script that starts a
new Emacs job, or restarts a paused Emacs if one exists.

@item
Gary Delp wrote @file{mailpost.el}, an interface between RMAIL and the
@file{/usr/uci/post} mailer.

@item
Matthieu Devin wrote @file{delsel.el}, a package to make newly-typed
text replace the current selection.

@item
Eric Ding wrote @file{goto-addr.el},

@item
Jan Dj@"{a}rv added support for the GTK+ toolkit and X drag-and-drop.

@item
Carsten Dominik wrote @file{reftex.el}, a package for setting up labels
and cross-references in La@TeX{} documents; and was the main author of
Org-mode, a mode for maintaining notes, todo lists, and project
planning.  Thomas Baumann, Bastien Guerry, Tassilo Horn, Philip Jackson,
Tokuya Kameshima, Eric Schulte, Andy Stewart, David O'Toole, John
Wiegley, and Piotr Zielinski also wrote various Org-mode components.

@item
Scott Draves wrote @file{tq.el}, help functions for maintaining
transaction queues between Emacs and its subprocesses.

@item
Benjamin Drieu wrote @file{pong.el}, an implementation of the classical
pong game.

@item
Viktor Dukhovni wrote support for dumping under SunOS version 4.

@item
John Eaton and Kurt Hornik wrote Octave mode.

@item
Rolf Ebert co-wrote Ada mode (@file{ada-mode.el}).

@item
Stephen Eglen wrote @file{mspools.el}, which tells you which Procmail
folders have mail waiting in them; and @file{iswitchb.el}, a feature
for incremental reading and completion of buffer names.

@item
Torbj@"orn Einarsson wrote @file{f90.el}, a mode for Fortran 90 files.

@item
Tsugutomo Enami co-wrote the support for international character sets.

@item
David Engster wrote @file{mairix.el}, an interface to the Mairix
indexing tool.

@item
Hans Henrik Eriksen wrote @file{simula.el}, a mode for editing SIMULA 87
code.

@item
Michael Ernst wrote @file{reposition.el}, a command for recentering a
function's source code and preceding comment on the screen.

@item
Ata Etemadi wrote @file{cdl.el}, functions for working with Common Data
Language source code.

@item
Frederick Farnbach implemented @file{morse.el}, which converts text to
Morse code.

@item
Oscar Figueiredo wrote EUDC, the Emacs Unified Directory Client, which
is an interface to directory servers via LDAP, CCSO PH/QI, or BBDB; and
@file{ldap.el}, the LDAP client interface.

@item
Fred Fish wrote the support for dumping COFF executable files.

@item
Karl Fogel wrote @file{bookmark.el}, which implements named
placeholders; @file{mail-hist.el}, a history mechanism for outgoing
mail messages; and @file{saveplace.el}, for preserving point's
location in files between editing sessions.

@item
Gary Foster wrote @file{crisp.el}, the emulation for CRiSP and Brief
editors, and @file{scroll-lock.el} (now @file{scroll-all.el}) a mode
for scrolling several buffers together.

@item
Noah Friedman wrote @file{rlogin.el}, an interface to Rlogin,
@file{type-break.el}, which reminds you to take periodic breaks from
typing, and @code{eldoc-mode}, a mode to show the defined parameters or
the doc string for the Lisp function near point.  With Roland McGrath,
he wrote @file{rsz-mini.el}, a minor mode to automatically resize the
minibuffer to fit the text it contains.

@item
Keith Gabryelski wrote @file{hexl.el}, a mode for editing binary files.

@item
Kevin Gallagher rewrote and enhanced the EDT emulation, and wrote
@file{flow-ctrl.el}, a package for coping with unsuppressible XON/XOFF
flow control.

@item
Kevin Gallo added multiple-frame support for Windows NT and wrote
@file{w32-win.el}, support functions for the MS-Windows window system.

@item
Juan Le@'{o}n Lahoz Garc@'{i}a wrote @file{wdired.el}, a package for
performing file operations by directly editing Dired buffers.

@item
Howard Gayle wrote much of the C and Lisp code for display tables and
case tables.  He also wrote @file{rot13.el}, a command to display the
plain-text form of a buffer encoded with the Caesar cipher;
@file{vt100-led.el}, a package for controlling the LED's on
VT100-compatible terminals; and much of the support for ISO-8859
European character sets (which includes @file{iso-ascii.el},
@file{iso-insert.el}, @file{iso-swed.el}, @file{latin-1.el},
@file{iso-syntax.el}, @file{iso-transl.el}, and @file{swedish.el}).

@item
Stephen Gildea made the Emacs quick reference card, and made many
contributions for @file{time-stamp.el}, a package for maintaining
last-change time stamps in files.

@item
Julien Gilles wrote @file{gnus-ml.el}, a mailing list minor mode for
Gnus.

@item
David Gillespie wrote the Common Lisp compatibility packages;
@code{Calc}, an advanced calculator and mathematical tool;
@file{complete.el}, a partial completion mechanism; and
@file{edmacro.el}, a package for editing keyboard macros.

@item
Bob Glickstein wrote @file{sregex.el}, a facility for writing regexps
using a Lisp-like syntax.

@item
Boris Goldowsky wrote @file{avoid.el}, a package to keep the mouse
cursor out of the way of the text cursor; @file{shadowfile.el}, a
package for keeping identical copies of files in more than one place;
@file{format.el}, a package for reading and writing files in various
formats; @file{enriched.el}, a package for saving text properties in
files; and @file{facemenu.el}, a package for specifying faces.

@item
Michelangelo Grigni wrote @file{ffap.el} which visits a file,
taking the file name from the buffer.

@item
Odd Gripenstam wrote @file{dcl-mode.el} for editing DCL command files.

@item
Michael Gschwind wrote @file{iso-cvt.el}, a package to convert between
the ISO 8859-1 character set and the notations for non-@acronym{ASCII}
characters used by @TeX{} and net tradition, and @file{latin-2.el},
code which sets up case-conversion and syntax tables for the ISO
Latin-2 character set.

@item
Henry Guillaume wrote @file{find-file.el}, a package to visit files
related to the currently visited file.

@item
Doug Gwyn wrote the portable @code{alloca} implementation.

@item
Ken'ichi Handa implemented most of the support for international
character sets, and wrote most of the Emacs 23 font handling code.  He
also wrote @file{composite.el}, which provides a minor mode that
composes characters automatically when they are displayed;
@file{isearch-x.el}, a facility for searching non-@acronym{ASCII}
text; and @file{ps-bdf.el}, a BDF font support for printing
non-@acronym{ASCII} text on a PostScript printer.  Together with Naoto
Takahashi, he wrote @file{quail.el}, an input facility for typing
non-@acronym{ASCII} text from an @acronym{ASCII} keyboard.

@item
Chris Hanson wrote @file{netuname.el}, a package to use HP-UX's Remote
File Access facility from Emacs.

@item
Jesper Harder wrote @file{yenc.el}, for decoding yenc encoded messages.

@item
K. Shane Hartman wrote @file{chistory.el} and @file{echistory.el},
packages for browsing command history lists; @file{electric.el} and
@file{helper.el}, which provide an alternative command loop and
appropriate help facilities; @file{emacsbug.el}, a package for
reporting Emacs bugs; @file{picture.el}, a mode for editing
@acronym{ASCII} pictures; and @file{view.el}, a package for perusing
files and buffers without editing them.

@item
John Heidemann wrote @file{mouse-copy.el} and @file{mouse-drag.el},
which provide alternative mouse-based editing and scrolling features.

@item
Jon K Hellan wrote @file{utf7.el}, support for mail-safe transformation
format of Unicode.

@item
Markus Heritsch co-wrote Ada mode (@file{ada-mode.el}).

@item
Karl Heuer wrote the original blessmail script, implemented the
@code{intangible} text property, and rearranged the structure of the
@code{Lisp_Object} type to allow for more data bits.

@item
Manabu Higashida ported Emacs to MS-DOS.

@item
Anders Holst wrote @file{hippie-exp.el}, a versatile completion and
expansion package.

@item
Tassilo Horn wrote DocView mode, allowing viewing of PDF, PostScript and
DVI documents.

@item
Tom Houlder wrote @file{mantemp.el}, which generates manual C@t{++}
template instantiations.

@item
Joakim Hove wrote @file{html2text.el}, a html to plain text converter.

@item
Denis Howe wrote @file{browse-url.el}, a package for invoking a WWW
browser to display a URL.

@item
Lars Magne Ingebrigtsen did a major redesign of the Gnus news-reader and
wrote many of its parts.

@item
Andrew Innes contributed extensively to the MS-Windows support.

@item
Seiichiro Inoue improved Emacs's XIM support.

@item
Philip Jackson wrote @file{find-cmd.el}, to build a @code{find}
command-line.

@item
Ulf Jasper wrote @file{icalendar.el}, a package for converting Emacs
diary entries to and from the iCalendar format;
@file{newsticker.el}, an RSS and Atom based Newsticker; and
@file{bubbles.el}, a puzzle game.

@item
Kyle Jones wrote @file{life.el}, a package to play Conway's ``life'' game,
and @file{mldrag.el}, a package which allows the user to resize windows
by dragging mode lines and vertical window separators with the mouse.

@item
Terry Jones wrote @file{shadow.el}, a package for finding potential
load-path problems when some Lisp file ``shadows'' another.

@item
Simon Josefsson wrote @file{dns-mode.el}, an editing mode for Domain
Name System master files; @file{flow-fill.el}, a package for
interpreting RFC2646 formatted text in messages; @file{fringe.el}, a
package for customizing the fringe; @file{imap.el}, an Emacs Lisp
library for talking to IMAP servers; @file{nnimap}, the IMAP back-end
for Gnus; and @file{rfc2104.el}, a hashed message authentication
facility.

@item
Arne J@o{}rgensen wrote @file{latexenc.el}, a package to
automatically guess the correct coding system in LaTeX files.

@item
Tomoji Kagatani implemented @file{smtpmail.el}, used for sending out
mail with SMTP.

@item
David Kaufman wrote @file{yow.c}, an essential utility program for the
hopelessly pinheaded.

@item
Henry Kautz wrote @file{bib-mode.el}, a mode for maintaining
bibliography databases compatible with @code{refer} (the @code{troff}
version) and @code{lookbib}, and @file{refbib.el}, a package to convert
those databases to the format used by the LaTeX text formatting package.

@item
Taichi Kawabata added support for Devanagari script and the Indian
languages.

@item
Howard Kaye wrote @file{sort.el}, commands to sort text in Emacs
buffers.

@item
Michael Kifer wrote @file{ediff.el}, an interactive interface to the
@command{diff}, @command{patch}, and @command{merge} programs, and
Viper, the newest emulation for VI.

@item
Richard King wrote the first version of @file{userlock.el} and
@file{filelock.c}, which provide simple support for multiple users
editing the same file.  He also wrote the initial version of
@file{uniquify.el}, a facility to make buffer names unique by adding
parts of the file's name to the buffer name.
@c We're not using his backquote.el any more.

@item
Peter Kleiweg wrote @file{ps-mode.el}, a mode for editing PostScript
files and running a PostScript interpreter interactively from within
Emacs.

@item
Pavel Kobiakov wrote @file{flymake.el}, a minor mode for performing
on-the-fly syntax checking.

@item
Larry K.@: Kolodney wrote @file{cvtmail.c}, a program to convert the mail
directories used by Gosling Emacs into RMAIL format.

@item
David M.@: Koppelman wrote @file{hi-lock.el}, a minor mode for
interactive automatic highlighting of parts of the buffer text.

@item
Koseki Yoshinori wrote @file{iimage.el}, a minor mode for displaying
inline images.

@item
Robert Krawitz wrote the original @file{xmenu.c}, part of Emacs's pop-up
menu support.

@item
Sebastian Kremer wrote Emacs 19's @code{dired-mode}, with contributions
by Lawrence R.@: Dodd.  He also wrote @file{ls-lisp.el}, a Lisp emulation
of the @code{ls} command for platforms which don't have @code{ls} as a
standard program.

@item
Geoff Kuenning wrote Emacs 19's @file{ispell.el}, based on work by Ken
Stevens and others.

@item
David K@ringaccent{a}gedal wrote @file{tempo.el}, providing support for
easy insertion of boilerplate text and other common constructions.

@item
Daniel LaLiberte wrote @file{edebug.el}, a source-level debugger for
Emacs Lisp; @file{cl-specs.el}, specifications to help @code{edebug}
debug code written using David Gillespie's Common Lisp support;
@file{cust-print.el}, a customizable package for printing lisp
objects; @file{eval-reg.el}, a re-implementation of @code{eval-region}
in Emacs Lisp; and @file{isearch.el}, Emacs's incremental search minor
mode.

@item
James R.@: Larus wrote @file{mh-e.el}, an interface to the MH mail system.

@item
Vinicius Jose Latorre wrote the Emacs printing facilities, as well as
@code{ps-print}, a package for pretty-printing Emacs buffers to
PostScript printers; @file{delim-col.el}, a package to arrange text
into columns; @file{ebnf2ps.el}, a package that translates EBNF
grammar to a syntactic chart that can be printed to a PostScript
printer; and @file{whitespace.el}, a package that detects and cleans
up excess whitespace in a file.  The previous version of
@file{whitespace.el}, used prior to Emacs 23, was written by Rajesh
Vaidheeswarran.

@item
Frederic Lepied wrote @file{expand.el}, which uses the abbrev
mechanism for inserting programming constructs.

@item
Peter Liljenberg wrote @file{elint.el}, a Lint-style code checker for
Emacs Lisp programs.

@item
Lars Lindberg wrote @file{msb.el}, which provides more flexible menus
for buffer selection, and rewrote @file{dabbrev.el}.

@item
Anders Lindgren wrote @file{autorevert.el}, a package for automatically
reverting files visited by Emacs that were changed on disk;
@file{cwarn.el}, a package to highlight suspicious C and C@t{++}
constructs; and @file{follow.el}, a minor mode to synchronize windows
that show the same buffer.

@item
Thomas Link wrote @file{filesets.el}, a package for handling sets of
files.

@item
Juri Linkov wrote @file{misearch.el}, extending isearch to multi-buffer
searches.

@item
K@'{a}roly L@"{o}rentey wrote the ``multi-terminal'' code, which
allows Emacs to run on graphical and text-only terminals
simultaneously.

@item
Dave Love wrote much of the code dealing with Unicode support and
Latin-N unification.  He added support for many coding systems,
including those in @file{code-pages.el} and the various UTF-7 and
UTF-16 coding systems.  He also wrote @code{autoarg-mode}, a global
minor mode whereby digit keys supply prefix arguments;
@code{autoarg-kp-mode}, which redefines the keypad numeric keys to
digit arguments; @file{autoconf.el}, a mode for editing Autoconf
files; @file{cfengine.el}, a mode for editing Cfengine files;
@file{elide-head.el}, a package for eliding boilerplate text from file
headers; @file{hl-line.el}, a minor mode for highlighting the line in
the current window on which point is; @file{latin-8.el} and
@file{latin-9.el}, which set up case-conversion and syntax tables for
the ISO Latin-8 and Latin-9 character sets; @file{latin1-disp.el}, a
package that lets you display ISO 8859 characters on Latin-1 terminals
by setting up appropriate display tables; @file{python.el}, a major
mode for the Python programming language; @file{refill.el}, a mode for
automatic paragraph refilling, akin to typical word processors;
@file{smiley-ems.el}, a facility for displaying smiley faces;
@file{sym-comp.el}, a library for performing mode-dependent symbol
completion; and @file{tool-bar.el}, a mode to control the display of
the Emacs tool bar.

@item
Eric Ludlam wrote the Speedbar package.  He also wrote
@file{checkdoc.el}, for checking doc strings in Emacs Lisp programs;
@file{dframe.el}, providing dedicatd frame support modes; and
@file{ezimage.el}, a generalized way to place images over text.

@item
Alan Mackenzie wrote the integrated AWK support in CC Mode, and
maintained CC Mode from Emacs 22 onwards.

@item
Christopher J.@: Madsen wrote @file{decipher.el}, a package for cracking
simple substitution ciphers.

@item
Neil M.@: Mager wrote @file{appt.el}, functions to notify users of their
appointments.  It finds appointments recorded in the diary files
generated by Edward M.@: Reingold's @code{calendar} package.

@item
Ken Manheimer wrote @file{allout.el}, a mode for manipulating and
formatting outlines, and @file{icomplete.el}, which provides incremental
completion feedback in the minibuffer.

@item
Bill Mann wrote @file{perl-mode.el}, a mode for editing Perl code.

@item
Brian Marick and Daniel LaLiberte wrote @file{hideif.el}, support for
hiding selected code within C @code{#ifdef} clauses.

@item
Simon Marshall wrote @file{regexp-opt.el}, which generates a regular
expression from a list of strings.  He also extended @file{comint.el},
originally written by Olin Shivers.

@item
Bengt Martensson, Marc Shapiro, Mike Newton, Aaron Larson, and Stefan
Schoef, wrote @file{bibtex.el}, a mode for editing Bib@TeX{}
bibliography files.

@item
Charlie Martin wrote @file{autoinsert.el}, which provides automatic
mode-sensitive insertion of text into new files.

@item
Yukihiro Matsumoto and Nobuyoshi Nakada wrote Ruby-mode.

@item
Thomas May wrote @file{blackbox.el}, a version of the traditional
blackbox game.

@item
Roland McGrath wrote @file{compile.el}, a package for running
compilations in a buffer, and then visiting the locations reported in
error messages; @file{etags.el}, a package for jumping to function
definitions and searching or replacing in all the files mentioned in a
@file{TAGS} file; @file{find-dired.el}, for using @code{dired}
commands on output from the @code{find} program, with Sebastian
Kremer; @file{map-ynp.el}, a general purpose boolean question-asker;
@file{autoload.el}, providing semi-automatic maintenance of autoload
files; and @file{upd-copyr.el}, providing semi-automatic maintenance
of copyright notices in source code.

@item
David Megginson wrote @file{derived.el}, which allows one to define new
major modes by inheriting key bindings and commands from existing major
modes.

@item
Will Mengarini wrote @file{repeat.el}, a command to repeat the preceding
command with its arguments.

@item
Wayne Mesard wrote @file{hscroll.el} which does horizontal scrolling
automatically.

@item
Brad Miller wrote @file{gnus-gl.el}, a Gnus interface for GroupLens.

@item
Richard Mlynarik wrote @file{cl-indent.el}, a package for indenting
Common Lisp code; @file{ebuff-menu.el}, an ``electric'' browser for
buffer listings; @file{ehelp.el}, bindings for browsing help screens;
@file{rfc822.el}, a parser for E-mail addresses in the RFC-822 format,
used in mail messages and news articles; @file{terminal.el}, a
terminal emulator for Emacs subprocesses; and @file{yow.el}, an
essential utility.

@item
Gerd Moellmann was the Emacs maintainer from the beginning of Emacs 21
development until the release of 21.1.  He wrote the new display
engine used from Emacs 21 onwards, and the asynchronous timers
facility.  He also wrote @code{ebrowse}, the C@t{++} browser;
@file{jit-lock.el}, the Just-In-Time font-lock support mode;
@file{tooltip.el}, a package for displaying tooltips; and
@file{authors.el}, a package for maintaining the @file{AUTHORS} files.

@item
Stefan Monnier was the Emacs co-maintainer for Emacs 23.  He added
support for Arch and Subversion to VC, re-wrote much of the Emacs
server to use the built-in networking primitives, and re-wrote the
abbrev and minibuffer completion code for Emacs 23.  He also wrote
@code{PCL-CVS}, a directory-level front end to the CVS version control
system; @file{reveal.el}, a minor mode for automatically revealing
invisible text; @file{smerge-mode.el}, a minor mode for resolving
@code{diff3} conflicts; and @file{diff-mode.el}, a mode for viewing
and editing context diffs.

@item
Morioka Tomohiko wrote several packages for MIME support in Gnus and
elsewhere.

@item
Sen Nagata wrote @file{crm.el}, a package for reading multiple strings
with completion, and @file{rfc2368.el}, support for @code{mailto:}
URLs.

@item
Erik Naggum wrote the time-conversion functions.  He also wrote
@file{disp-table.el}, a package for dealing with display tables,
@file{latin-4.el} and @file{latin-5.el}, code which sets up
case-conversion and syntax tables for the ISO Latin-4 and Latin-5
character sets, @file{mailheader.el}, a package for parsing email
headers, and @file{parse-time.el}, a package for parsing time strings.

@item
Thomas Neumann and Eric Raymond wrote @file{makefile.el} (now
@file{make-mode.el}), a mode for editing makefiles.

@item
Thien-Thi Nguyen and Dan Nicolaescu wrote @file{hideshow.el}, a minor
mode for selectively displaying blocks of text.

@item
Dan Nicolaescu added support for running Emacs as a daemon.  He also
wrote @file{romanian.el}, support for editing Romanian text;
@file{iris-ansi.el}, support for running Emacs on SGI's @code{xwsh}
and @code{winterm} terminal emulators; and @file{vc-dir.el}, displaying
the status of version-controlled directories.

@item
Jurgen Nickelsen wrote @file{ws-mode.el}, providing WordStar emulation.

@item
Hrvoje Niksic wrote @file{savehist.el}, for saving the minibuffer
history between Emacs sessions.

@item
Jeff Norden wrote @file{kermit.el}, a package to help the Kermit
dialup communications program run comfortably in an Emacs shell buffer.

@item
Andrew Norman wrote @file{ange-ftp.el}, providing transparent FTP
support.

@item
Edward O'Connor wrote @file{json.el}, a file for parsing and
generating JSON files.

@item
Kentaro Ohkouchi created the Emacs icons used beginning with Emacs 23.

@item
Alexandre Oliva wrote @file{gnus-mlspl.el}, a group params-based mail
splitting mechanism.

@item
Takaaki Ota wrote @file{table.el}, a package for creating and editing
embedded text-based tables.

@item
Pieter E.@: J.@: Pareit wrote @file{mixal-mode.el}, an editing mode for
the MIX assembly language.

@item
David Pearson wrote @file{quickurl.el}, a simple method of inserting a
URL into the current buffer based on text at point; @file{5x5.el}, a
game to fill all squares on the field.

@item
Jeff Peck wrote @file{sun.el}, key bindings for sunterm keys;
@file{sun-curs.el}, cursor definitions for Sun Windows; and
@file{sun-fns.el} and @file{sun-mouse.el}, providing mouse support for
Sun Windows.

@item
Damon Anton Permezel wrote @file{hanoi.el}, an animated demonstration of
the ``Towers of Hanoi'' puzzle.

@item
William M.@: Perry wrote @file{mailcap.el}, a MIME media types
configuration facility, @file{mwheel.el}, a package for supporting
mouse wheels, and the URL package.

@item
Per Persson wrote @file{gnus-vm.el}, the VM interface for Gnus.

@item
Jens Petersen wrote @file{find-func.el}, which makes it easy to find
the source code for an Emacs Lisp function or variable.

@item
Daniel Pfeiffer wrote @file{conf-mode.el}, a mode for editing
configuration files; @file{copyright.el}, a package for updating
copyright notices in files; @file{executable.el}, a package for
executing interpreter scripts; @file{sh-script.el}, a mode for editing
shell scripts; @file{skeleton.el}, implementing a concise language for
writing statement skeletons; and @file{two-column.el}, a minor mode
for simultaneous two-column editing.

Daniel also rewrote @file{apropos.el}, originally written by Joe Wells,
and, together with Jim Blandy, co-authored @file{wyse50.el}, support for
Wyse 50 terminals.

@item
Richard L.@: Pieri wrote @file{pop3.el}, a Post Office Protocol (RFC
1460) interface for Emacs.

@item
Fred Pierresteguy and Paul Reilly made Emacs work with X Toolkit
widgets.

@item
Christian Plaunt wrote @file{soundex.el}, an implementation of the
Soundex algorithm for comparing English words by their pronunciation.

@item
David Ponce wrote @file{recentf.el}, a package that puts a menu of
recently visited files in the Emacs menu bar; @file{ruler-mode.el}, a
minor mode for displaying a ruler in the header line; and
@file{tree-widget.el}, a package to display hierarchical data
structures.

@item
Francesco A.@: Potorti wrote @file{cmacexp.el}, providing a command which
runs the C preprocessor on a region of a file and displays the results.
He also expanded and redesigned the @code{etags} program.

@item
Michael D.@: Prange and Steven A.@: Wood wrote @file{fortran.el}, a mode for
editing FORTRAN code.
@c We're not distributing his tex-mode.el anymore; we're using Ed Reingold's.

@item
Mukesh Prasad wrote @file{vmsproc.el}, a facility for running
asynchronous subprocesses on VMS.

@item
Marko Rahamaa wrote @file{latin-3.el}, code which sets up
case-conversion and syntax tables for the ISO Latin-3 character set.

@item
Ashwin Ram wrote @file{refer.el}, commands to look up references in
bibliography files by keyword.

@item
Eric S.@: Raymond wrote @file{vc.el}, an interface to the RCS and SCCS
source code version control systems, with Paul Eggert; @file{gud.el},
a package for running source-level debuggers like GDB and SDB in
Emacs; @file{asm-mode.el}, a mode for editing assembly language code;
@file{AT386.el}, terminal support package for IBM's AT keyboards;
@file{cookie1.el}, support for ``fortune-cookie'' programs like
@file{yow.el} and @file{spook.el}; @file{finder.el}, a package for
finding Emacs Lisp packages by keyword and topic; @file{keyswap.el},
code to swap the @key{BS} and @key{DEL} keys; @file{loadhist.el},
functions for loading and unloading Emacs features;
@file{lisp-mnt.el}, functions for working with the special headers
used in Emacs Lisp library files; and code to set and make use of the
@code{load-history} lisp variable, which records the source file from
which each lisp function loaded into Emacs came.

@item
Edward M.@: Reingold wrote the extensive calendar and diary support (try
@kbd{M-x calendar}), with contributions from Stewart Clamen, Nachum
Dershowitz, Paul Eggert, Steve Fisk, Michael Kifer, and Lara Rios.  Andy
Oram contributed to its documentation.  Reingold has also contributed to
@file{tex-mode.el}, a mode for editing @TeX{} files, as have William
F.@: Schelter, Dick King, Stephen Gildea, Michael Prange, and Jacob Gore.

@item
David Reitter wrote @file{mailclient.el} which can send mail via the
system's designated mail client.

@item
Alex Rezinsky wrote @file{which-func.el}, a mode that shows the name
of the current function in the mode line.

@item
Rob Riepel wrote @file{tpu-edt.el} and its associated files, providing
an emulation of the VMS TPU text editor emulating the VMS EDT editor,
and @file{vt-control.el}, providing some control functions for the DEC
VT line of terminals.

@item
Nick Roberts wrote @file{gdb-ui.el}, the graphical user interface to
GDB.

@item
Roland B.@: Roberts contributed much of the VMS support distributed with
Emacs 19, along with Joseph M.@: Kelsey, and @file{vms-pmail.el}, support
for using Emacs within VMS MAIL.

@item
John Robinson wrote @file{bg-mouse.el}, support for the mouse on the BBN
Bitgraph terminal.

@item
Danny Roozendaal implemented @file{handwrite.el}, which converts text
into ``handwriting.''

@item
William Rosenblatt wrote @file{float.el}, implementing a floating-point
numeric type using Lisp cons cells and integers.

@item
Guillermo J.@: Rozas wrote @file{scheme.el}, a mode for editing Scheme and
DSSSL code, and @file{fakemail.c}, an interface to the System V mailer.

@item
Ivar Rummelhoff wrote @file{winner.el}, which records recent window
configurations so you can move back to them.

@item
Jason Rumney ported the Emacs 21 display engine to MS-Windows, and has
contributed extensively to the MS-Windows port of Emacs.

@item
Wolfgang Rupprecht wrote Emacs 19's floating-point support (including
@file{float-sup.el} and @file{floatfns.c}), and @file{sup-mouse.el},
support for the Supdup mouse on lisp machines.

@item
Kevin Ryde wrote @file{info-xref.el}, a library for checking
references in Info files.

@item
James B.@: Salem and Brewster Kahle wrote @file{completion.el}, providing
dynamic word completion.

@item
Masahiko Sato wrote @file{vip.el}, an emulation of the VI editor.

@item
Holger Schauer wrote @file{fortune.el}, a package for using fortune in
message signatures.

@item
William Schelter wrote @file{telnet.el}, support for @code{telnet}
sessions within Emacs.

@item
Ralph Schleicher wrote @file{battery.el}, a package for displaying
laptop computer battery status, and @file{info-look.el}, a package for
looking up Info documentation for symbols in the buffer.

@item
Michael Schmidt and Tom Perrine wrote @file{modula2.el}, a mode for
editing Modula-2 code, based on work by Mick Jordan and Peter Robinson.

@item
Ronald S.@: Schnell wrote @file{dunnet.el}, a text adventure game.

@item
Philippe Schnoebelen wrote @file{gomoku.el}, a Go Moku game played
against Emacs, and @file{mpuz.el}, a multiplication puzzle.

@item
Jan Schormann wrote @file{solitaire.el}, an Emacs Lisp implementation of
the Solitaire game.

@item
Alex Schroeder wrote @file{ansi-color.el}, a package for translating
ANSI color escape sequences to Emacs faces, and @file{sql.el}, a package
for interactively running an SQL interpreter in an Emacs buffer.

@item
Randal Schwartz wrote @file{pp.el}, a pretty-printer for lisp objects.

@item
Oliver Seidel wrote @file{todo-mode.el}, a package for maintaining
@file{TODO} list files.

@item
Manuel Serrano wrote the Flyspell package, which does spell checking
as you type.

@item
Hovav Shacham wrote @file{windmove.el}, a set of commands for selecting
windows based on their geometrical position on the frame.

@item
Stanislav Shalunov wrote @file{uce.el}, for responding to unsolicited
commercial email.

@item
Richard Sharman wrote @file{hilit-chg.el}, which uses colors to show
recent editing changes.

@item
Olin Shivers wrote @file{comint.el}, a library for modes running
interactive command-line- oriented subprocesses; @file{cmuscheme.el},
for running inferior Scheme processes; @file{inf-lisp.el}, for running
inferior Lisp process; and @file{shell.el}, for running inferior
shells.

@item
Espen Skoglund wrote @file{pascal.el}, a mode for editing Pascal code.

@item
Rick Sladkey wrote @file{backquote.el}, a lisp macro for creating
mostly-constant data.

@item
Lynn Slater wrote @file{help-macro.el}, a macro for writing interactive
help for key bindings.

@item
Chris Smith wrote @file{icon.el}, a mode for editing Icon code.

@item
David Smith wrote @file{ielm.el}, a mode for interacting with the Emacs
Lisp interpreter as a subprocess.

@item
Paul D.@: Smith wrote @file{snmp-mode.el}.

@item
William Sommerfeld wrote @file{scribe.el}, a mode for editing Scribe
files, and @file{server.el}, a package allowing programs to send files
to an extant Emacs job to be edited.

@item
Andre Spiegel made many contributions to the Emacs Version Control
package, and in particular made it support multiple back ends.

@item
Michael Staats wrote @file{pc-select.el}, which rebinds keys for
selecting regions to follow many other systems.

@item
Richard Stallman invented Emacs.  He is the original author of GNU
Emacs, and has been Emacs maintainer over several non-contiguous
periods.  In addition to much of the ``core'' Emacs code, he has
written @file{easymenu.el}, a facility for defining Emacs menus;
@file{menu-bar.el}, the Emacs menu bar support code; and
@file{paren.el}, a package to make matching parentheses stand out in
color.

@item
Sam Steingold wrote @file{gulp.el}, a facility for asking package
maintainers for updated versions of their packages via e-mail, and
@file{midnight.el}, a package for running a command every midnight.

@item
Ake Stenhoff and Lars Lindberg wrote @file{imenu.el}, a framework for
browsing indices made from buffer contents.

@item
Peter Stephenson wrote @file{vcursor.el}, which implements a ``virtual
cursor'' that you can move with the keyboard and use for copying text.

@item
Ken Stevens wrote the initial version of @file{ispell.el} and maintains
that package since Ispell 3.1 release.

@item
Jonathan Stigelman wrote @file{hilit19.el}, a package providing
automatic highlighting in source code buffers, mail readers, and other
contexts.

@item
Kim F.@: Storm made many improvements to the Emacs display engine,
process support, and networking support. He also wrote
@file{bindat.el}, a package for encoding and decoding binary data;
@file{cua.el}, which allows Emacs to emulate the standard CUA key
bindings; @file{ido.el}, a package for selecting buffers and files
quickly; and @file{kmacro.el}, the keyboard macro facility.

@item
Martin Stjernholm co-authored CC Mode, a major editing mode for C,
C@t{++}, Objective-C, Java, Pike, CORBA IDL, and AWK code.

@item
Steve Strassman did not write @file{spook.el}, and even if he did, he
really didn't mean for you to use it in an anarchistic way.

@item
Olaf Sylvester wrote @file{bs.el}, a package for manipulating Emacs
buffers.

@item
Tibor @v{S}imko and Milan Zamazal wrote @file{slovak.el}, support for
editing text in Slovak language.

@item
Naoto Takahashi wrote @file{utf-8.el}, support for encoding and
decoding UTF-8 data.

@item
Luc Teirlinck wrote @file{help-at-pt.el}, providing local help through
the keyboard.

@item
Jean-Philippe Theberge wrote @file{thumbs.el}, a package for viewing
image files as ``thumbnails.''

@item
Jens T.@: Berger Thielemann wrote @file{word-help.el}, which is
part of the basis for @file{info-look.el}.

@item
Spencer Thomas wrote the original @file{dabbrev.el}, providing a command
which completes the partial word before point, based on other nearby
words for which it is a prefix.  He also wrote the original dumping
support.

@item
Jim Thompson wrote @file{ps-print.el}, which converts
Emacs text to PostScript.

@item
Markus Triska wrote @file{linum.el}, a minor mode that displays line
numbers in the left margin.

@item
Tom Tromey and Chris Lindblad wrote @file{tcl.el}, a mode for editing
Tcl/Tk source files and running a Tcl interpreter as an Emacs
subprocess.

@item
Tom Tromey wrote @file{bug-reference.el}, providing clickable links to
bug reports.

@item
Eli Tziperman wrote @file{rmail-spam-filter.el}, a spam filter for RMAIL.

@item
Daiki Ueno wrote @file{starttls.el}, support for Transport Layer
Security protocol; and the EasyPG (and its predecessor PGG) package
for GnuPG and PGP support.

@item
Masanobu Umeda wrote GNUS, a feature-rich reader for Usenet news.  He
also wrote @file{prolog.el}, a mode for editing Prolog code;
@file{rmailsort.el}, a package for sorting messages in RMAIL folders;
@file{metamail.el}, an interface to the Metamail program;
@file{gnus-kill.el}, the Kill File mode for Gnus; @file{gnus-mh.el},
an mh-e interface for Gnus; @file{gnus-msg.el}, a mail and post
interface for Gnus; @file{tcp.el}, emulation of the
@code{open-network-stream} function for some Emacs configurations
which lack it; and @file{timezone.el}, providing functions for dealing
with time zones.

@item
Neil W.@: Van Dyke wrote @file{webjump.el}, a ``hot links'' package.

@item
Didier Verna wrote @file{rect.el}, a package of functions for
operations on rectangle regions of text.

@item
Ulrik Vieth implemented @file{meta-mode.el}, for editing MetaFont code.

@item
Geoffrey Voelker wrote the Windows NT support.  He also wrote
@file{dos-w32.el}, functions shared by the MS-DOS and MS-Windows ports
of Emacs, and @file{w32-fns.el}, MS-Windows specific support functions.

@item
Johan Vromans wrote @file{forms.el} and its associated files, a
mode for filling in forms.

@item
Colin Walters wrote @file{ibuffer.el}, a mode for operating on
buffers.

@item
Barry Warsaw wrote @file{assoc.el}, a set of utility functions for
working with association lists; @file{cc-mode.el}, a mode for editing
C, C@t{++}, and Java code, based on earlier work by Dave Detlefs,
Stewart Clamen, and Richard Stallman; @file{elp.el}, a new profiler
for Emacs Lisp programs; @file{man.el}, a mode for reading UNIX manual
pages; @file{regi.el}, providing an AWK-like functionality for use in
lisp programs; @file{reporter.el}, providing customizable bug
reporting for lisp packages; and @file{supercite.el}, a minor mode for
quoting sections of mail messages and news articles.

@item
Morten Welinder helped port Emacs to MS-DOS, and introduced face
support into the MS-DOS port of Emacs.  He also wrote
@file{desktop.el}, facilities for saving some of Emacs's state between
sessions; @file{timer.el}, the Emacs facility to run commands at a
given time or frequency, or when Emacs is idle, and its C-level
support code; @file{pc-win.el}, the MS-DOS ``window-system'' support;
@file{internal.el}, an ``internal terminal'' emulator for the MS-DOS
port of Emacs; @file{arc-mode.el}, the mode for editing compressed
archives; @file{s-region.el}, commands for setting the region using
the shift key and motion commands; and @file{dos-fns.el}, functions
for use under MS-DOS.

@item
Joseph Brian Wells wrote @file{apropos.el}, a command to find
commands, functions, and variables whose names contain matches for a
regular expression; @file{resume.el}, support for processing
command-line arguments after resuming a suspended Emacs job; and
@file{mail-extr.el}, a package for extracting names and addresses from
mail headers, with contributions from Jamie Zawinski.

@item
Rodney Whitby and Reto Zimmermann wrote @file{vhdl-mode.el}, a major
mode for editing VHDL source code.

@item
John Wiegley wrote @file{align.el}, a set of commands for aligning
text according to regular-expression based rules; @file{timeclock.el},
a package for keeping track of time spent on projects;
@file{pcomplete.el}, a programmable completion facility;
@file{remember.el}, a mode for jotting down things to remember; and
@code{eshell}, a command shell implemented entirely in Emacs Lisp.

@item
Ed Wilkinson wrote @file{b2m.c}, a program to convert mail files from
RMAIL format to Unix @code{mbox} format.

@item
Mike Williams wrote @file{mouse-sel.el}, providing enhanced mouse
selection, and @file{thingatpt.el}, a library of functions for finding
the ``thing'' (word, line, s-expression) containing point.

@item
Roland Winkler wrote @file{proced.el}, a system process editor.

@item
Bill Wohler wrote the Emacs interface to the MH mail system.

@item
Dale R.@: Worley wrote @file{emerge.el}, a package for interactively
merging two versions of a file.

@item
Francis J.@: Wright wrote @code{WoMan}, a package for browsing
manual pages without the @code{man} command.

@item
Tom Wurgler wrote @file{emacs-lock.el}, which makes it harder
to exit with valuable buffers unsaved.

@item
Masatake Yamato wrote @file{ld-script.el}, an editing mode for GNU
linker scripts, and contributed subword handling in CC mode.

@item
Jonathan Yavner wrote @file{testcover.el}, a package for keeping track
of the testing status of Emacs Lisp code, and the SES spreadsheet
package.

@item
Ryan Yeske wrote @file{rcirc.el} a simple Internet Relay Chat client.

@item
Ilya Zakharevich and Bob Olson wrote @file{cperl-mode.el}, a major
mode for editing Perl code.  Ilya Zakharevich also wrote
@file{tmm.el}, a mode for accessing the Emacs menu bar on a text-mode
terminal.

@item
Milan Zamazal wrote @file{czech.el}, support for editing Czech text,
@file{glasses.el}, a package for easier reading of source code which
uses illegible identifier names, and @file{tildify.el}, commands for
adding hard spaces to text, @TeX{}, and SGML/HTML files.

@item
Victor Zandy wrote @file{zone.el}, a package for people who like to
zone out in front of Emacs.

@item
Eli Zaretskii made many standard Emacs features work on MS-DOS and
Microsoft Windows.  He also wrote @file{tty-colors.el}, which
implements transparent mapping of X colors to tty colors, and
(together with Kenichi Handa) @file{codepage.el}, a package for
editing text encoded in DOS/Windows code pages.

@item
Jamie Zawinski wrote much of the support for faces and X selections.
With Hallvard Furuseth, he wrote the optimizing byte compiler used
from Emacs 19 onwards.  He also wrote @file{mailabbrev.el}, a package
that provides automatic expansion of mail aliases, and
@file{tar-mode.el}, which provides simple viewing and editing commands
for tar files.

@item
Andrew Zhilin created the Emacs 22 icons.

@item
Shenghuo Zhu wrote @file{binhex.el}, a package for reading and writing
binhex files; @file{mm-partial.el}, message/partial support for MIME
messages; @file{rfc1843.el}, an HZ decoding package;
@file{uudecode.el}, an Emacs Lisp decoder for uuencoded data; and
@file{webmail.el}, an interface to Web mail.

@item
Ian T.@: Zimmerman wrote @file{gametree.el}.

@item
Neal Ziring and Felix S.@: T.@: Wu wrote @file{vi.el}, an emulation of the
VI text editor.

@item
Detlev Zundel wrote @file{re-builder.el}, a package for building regexps
with visual feedback.

@end itemize

@ignore
   arch-tag: bb1d0fa4-0240-4992-b5d4-8602d1e3d4ba
@end ignore
