\input texinfo  @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c This file is used for printing the GNU Emacs Lisp Reference Manual
@c in two volumes.  It is a modified version of elisp.texi.
@c Copyright (C) 1990-1995, 1998-1999, 2001-2012
@c   Free Software Foundation, Inc.
@c %**start of header
@setfilename elisp
@settitle GNU Emacs Lisp Reference Manual: Volume 2
@c %**end of header

@c See two-volume-cross-refs.txt.
@tex
\message{Formatting for two volume edition...Volume 2...}
%
% Read special toc file, set up in two-volume.make.
\gdef\tocreadfilename{elisp2-toc-ready.toc}
%
% Don't make outlines, they're not needed and \readdatafile can't pay
% attention to the special definition above.
\global\let\pdfmakeoutlines=\relax
%
% Start volume 2 chapter numbering at 27; this must be listed as chapno26
\global\chapno=26
@end tex

@c Version of the manual and of Emacs.
@set VERSION  3.1
@include emacsver.texi
@set DATE May 2012

@dircategory Emacs
@direntry
* Elisp: (elisp).       The Emacs Lisp Reference Manual.
@end direntry

@c in general, keep the following line commented out, unless doing a
@c copy of this manual that will be published.  the manual should go
@c onto the distribution in the full, 8.5 x 11" size.
@set smallbook

@ifset smallbook
@smallbook
@end ifset

@c per rms and peterb, use 10pt fonts for the main text, mostly to
@c save on paper cost.
@c Do this inside @tex for now, so current makeinfo does not complain.
@tex
@ifset smallbook
@fonttextsize 10
\global\let\urlcolor=\Black % don't print links in grayscale
\global\let\linkcolor=\Black
@end ifset
\global\hbadness=6666 % don't worry about not-too-underfull boxes
@end tex

@c Combine indices.
@synindex cp fn
@syncodeindex vr fn
@syncodeindex ky fn
@syncodeindex pg fn
@c We use the "type index" to index new functions and variables.
@c @syncodeindex tp fn

@copying
This is edition @value{VERSION} of the GNU Emacs Lisp Reference Manual,@*
corresponding to Emacs version @value{EMACSVER}.

Copyright @copyright{} 1990-1996, 1998-2012 Free Software Foundation, Inc.

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3 or
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with the
Invariant Sections being ``GNU General Public License,'' with the
Front-Cover texts being ``A GNU Manual,'' and with the Back-Cover
Texts as in (a) below.  A copy of the license is included in the
section entitled ``GNU Free Documentation License.''

(a) The FSF's Back-Cover Text is: ``You have the freedom to copy and
modify this GNU manual.  Buying copies from the FSF supports it in
developing GNU and promoting software freedom.''
@end quotation
@end copying

@titlepage
@title GNU Emacs Lisp Reference Manual
@subtitle Volume 2
@subtitle For Emacs Version @value{EMACSVER}
@subtitle Revision @value{VERSION}, @value{DATE}

@author by Bil Lewis, Dan LaLiberte, Richard Stallman,
@author the GNU Manual Group, et al.
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying

@sp 2
Published by the Free Software Foundation @*
51 Franklin St, Fifth Floor @*
Boston, MA 02110-1301 @*
USA @*
ISBN 1-882114-74-4

@sp 2
Cover art by Etienne Suvasa.
@end titlepage


@c Print the tables of contents
@summarycontents
@contents


@ifnottex
@node Top
@top Emacs Lisp

This Info file contains edition @value{VERSION} of the GNU Emacs Lisp
Reference Manual, corresponding to GNU Emacs version @value{EMACSVER}.
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Not used::                This file is only used with tex, which
                              generates its own menu.

@detailmenu
 --- The Detailed Node Listing ---
 ---------------------------------

Here are other nodes that are subnodes of those already listed,
mentioned here so you can get to them in one step:

Here are other nodes that are subnodes of those already listed,
mentioned here so you can get to them in one step:

Not used

* Not used::                This file is only used with TeX, which
                              generates its own menu.
@end detailmenu
@end menu

@c include intro.texi
@c include objects.texi
@c include numbers.texi
@c include strings.texi

@c include lists.texi
@c include sequences.texi
@c include hash.texi
@c include symbols.texi
@c include eval.texi

@c include control.texi
@c include variables.texi
@c include functions.texi
@c include macros.texi

@c include customize.texi
@c include loading.texi
@c include compile.texi
@c include advice.texi

@c This includes edebug.texi.
@c include debugging.texi
@c include streams.texi
@c include minibuf.texi
@c include commands.texi

@c include keymaps.texi
@c include modes.texi
@c include help.texi
@c include files.texi

@c include backups.texi

@c ================ Beginning of Volume 2 ================
@include buffers.texi
@include windows.texi
@include frames.texi

@include positions.texi
@include markers.texi
@include text.texi
@include nonascii.texi

@include searching.texi
@include syntax.texi
@include abbrevs.texi
@include processes.texi

@include display.texi
@include os.texi

@c appendices

@include anti.texi
@include doclicense.texi
@include gpl.texi
@include tips.texi
@include internals.texi
@include errors.texi
@include maps.texi
@include hooks.texi

@include index.texi

@ignore
@node New Symbols, , Index, Top
@unnumbered New Symbols Since the Previous Edition

@printindex tp
@end ignore

@bye


These words prevent "local variables" above from confusing Emacs.
